After decades of patient mismanagement and loving neglect, The Ford County Times
went bankrupt in 1970. The owner and publisher, Miss Emma Caudle, was ninety-three
years old and strapped to a bed in a nursing home in Tupelo. The editor, her son Wilson
Caudle, was in his seventies and had a plate in his head from the First War. A perfect
circle of dark grafted skin covered the plate at the top of his long, sloping forehead, and
throughout his adult life he had endured the nickname of Spot. Spot did this. Spot did that.
Here, Spot. There, Spot.
In his younger years, he covered town meetings, football games, elections, trials, church
socials, all sorts of activities in Ford County. He was a good reporter, thorough and
intuitive. Evidently, the head wound did not affect his ability to write. But sometime after
the Second War the plate apparently shifted, and Mr. Caudle stopped writing everything
but the obituaries. He loved obituaries. He spent hours on them. He filled paragraphs of
eloquent prose detailing the lives of even the humblest of Ford Countians. And the death
of a wealthy or prominent citizen was front page news, with Mr. Caudle seizing the
moment. He never missed a wake or a funeral, never wrote anything bad about anyone.
All received glory in the end. Ford County was a wonderful place to die. And Spot was a
very popular man, even though he was crazy.
The only real crisis of his journalistic career happened in 1967, about the time the civil
rights movement finally made it to Ford County. The paper had never shown the slightest
hint of racial tolerance. No black faces appeared in its pages, except those belonging to
known or suspected criminals. No black wedding announcements. No black honor
students or baseball teams. But in 1967, Mr. Caudle made a startling discovery. He
awoke one morning to the realization that black people were dying in Ford County, and
their deaths were not being properly reported. There was a whole, new, fertile world of
obituaries waiting out there, and Mr. Caudle set sail in dangerous and uncharted waters.
On Wednesday, March 8, 1967, the Times became the first white-owned weekly in
Mississippi to run the obituary of a Negro. For the most part, it went unnoticed.
The following week, he ran three black obituaries, and people were beginning to talk. By
the fourth week, a regular boycott was under way, with subscriptions being canceled and
advertisers holding their money. Mr. Caudle knew what was happening, but he was too
impressed with his new status as an integrationist to worry about such trivial matters as
sales and profits. Six weeks after the historic obituary, he announced, on the front page
and in bold print, his new policy. He explained to the public that he would publish
whatever he damned well pleased, and if the white folks didn’t like it, then he would
simply cut back on their obituaries.
Now, dying properly is an important part of living in Mississippi, for whites and blacks,
and the thought of being laid to rest without the benefit of one of Spot’s glorious sendoffs
was more than most whites could stand. And they knew he was crazy enough to
carry out his threat.
The next edition was filled with all sorts of obituaries, blacks and whites, all neatly
alphabetized and desegregated. It sold out, and a brief period of prosperity followed.
The bankruptcy was called involuntary, as if others had eager volunteers. The pack was
led by a print supplier from Memphis that was owed $60,000. Several creditors had not
been paid in six months. The old Security Bank was calling in a loan.
I was new, but I’d heard the rumors. I was sitting on a desk in the front room of the
Times’s offices reading a magazine, when a midget in a pair of pointed toes strutted in
the front door and asked for Wilson Caudle.
“He’s at the funeral home,” I said.
He was a cocky midget. I could see a gun on his hip under a wrinkled navy blazer, a gun
worn in such a manner so that folks would see it. He probably had a permit, but in Ford
County one was not really needed, not in 1970. In fact, permits were frowned upon. “I
need to serve these papers on him,” he said, waving an envelope.
I was not about to be helpful, but it’s difficult being rude to a midget. Even one with a
gun. “He’s at the funeral home,” I repeated.
“Then I’ll just leave them with you,” he declared.
Although I’d been around for less than two months, and though I’d gone to college up
North, I had learned a few things. I knew that good papers were not served on people.
They were mailed or shipped or hand-delivered, but never served. The papers were
trouble, and I wanted no part of them.
“I’m not taking the papers,” I said, looking down.
The laws of nature require midgets to be docile, noncombative people, and this little fella
was no exception. The gun was a ruse. He glanced around the front office with a smirk,
but he knew the situation was hopeless. With a flair for the dramatic, he stuffed the
envelope back into his pocket and demanded, “Where’s the funeral home?”
I pointed this way and that, and he left. An hour later, Spot stumbled through the door,
waving the papers and bawling hysterically. “It’s over! It’s over!” he kept wailing as I
held the Petition for Involuntary Bankruptcy. Margaret Wright, the secretary, and Hardy,
the pressman, came from the back and tried to console him. He sat in a chair, face in
hands, elbows on knees, sobbing pitifully. I read the petition aloud for the benefit of the
others.
It said Mr. Caudle had to appear in court in a week over in Oxford to meet with the
creditors and the Judge, and that a decision would be made as to whether the paper would
continue to operate while a trustee sorted things out. I could tell Margaret and Hardy
were more concerned about their jobs than about Mr. Caudle and his breakdown, but they
gamely stood next to him and patted his shoulders.
When the crying stopped, he suddenly stood, bit his lip, and announced, “I’ve got to tell
Mother.”
The three of us looked at each other. Miss Emma Caudle had departed this life years
earlier, but her feeble heart continued to work just barely enough to postpone a funeral.
She neither knew nor cared what color Jell-O they were feeding her, and she certainly
cared nothing about Ford County and its newspaper. She was blind and deaf and weighed
less than eighty pounds, and now Spot was about to discuss involuntary bankruptcy with
her. At that point, I realized that he, too, was no longer with us.
He started crying again and left. Six months later I would write his obituary.
Because I had attended college, and because I was holding the papers, Hardy and
Margaret looked hopefully at me for advice. I was a journalist, not a lawyer, but I said
that I would take the papers to the Caudle family lawyer. We would follow his advice.
They smiled weakly and returned to work.
At noon, I bought a six-pack at Quincy’s One Stop in Lowtown, the black section of
Clanton, and went for a long drive in my Spitfire. It was late in February, unseasonably
warm, so I put the top down and headed for the lake, wondering, not for the first time,
just exactly what I was doing in Ford County, Mississippi.