I grew up in Memphis and studied journalism at Syracuse for five years before my
grandmother got tired of paying for what was becoming an extended education. My
grades were unremarkable, and I was a year away from a degree. Maybe a year and a half.
She, BeeBee, had plenty of money, hated to spend it, and after five years she figured my
opportunity had been sufficiently funded. When she cut me off I was very disappointed,
but I did not complain, to her anyway. I was her only grandchild and her estate would be
a delight.
I studied journalism with a hangover. In the early days at Syracuse, I aspired to be an
investigative reporter with the New York Times or the Washington Post. I wanted to save
the world by uncovering corruption and environmental abuse and government waste and
the injustice suffered by the weak and oppressed. Pulitzers were waiting for me. After a
year or so of such lofty dreams, I saw a movie about a foreign correspondent who dashed
around the world looking for wars, seducing beautiful women, and somehow finding the
time to write award-winning stories. He spoke eight languages, wore a beard, combat
boots, starched khakis that never wrinkled. So I decided I would become such a journalist.
I grew a beard, bought some boots and khakis, tried to learn German, tried to score with
prettier girls. During my junior year, when my grades began their steady decline to the
bottom of the class, I became captivated by the idea of working for a small-town
newspaper. I cannot explain this attraction, except that it was at about this time that I met
and befriended Nick Diener. He was from rural Indiana, and for decades his family had
owned a rather prosperous county newspaper. He drove a fancy little Alfa Romeo and
always had plenty of cash. We became close friends.
Nick was a bright student who could have handled medicine, law, or engineering. His
only goal, however, was to return to Indiana and run the family business. This baffled me
until we got drunk one night and he told me how much his father cleared each year off
their small weekly—circulation six thousand. It was a gold mine, he said. Just local news,
wedding announcements, church socials, honor rolls, sports coverage, pictures of
basketball teams, a few recipes, a few obituaries, and pages of advertising. Maybe a little
politics, but stay away from controversy. And count your money. His father was a
millionaire. It was laid-back, low-pressure journalism with money growing on trees,
according to Nick.
This appealed to me. After my fourth year, which should’ve been my last but wasn’t
close, I spent the summer interning at a small weekly in the Ozark Mountains of
Arkansas. The pay was peanuts but BeeBee was impressed because I was employed.
Each week I mailed her the paper, at least half of which was written by me. The
owner/editor/publisher was a wonderful old gentleman who was delighted to have a
reporter who wanted to write. He was quite wealthy.
After five years at Syracuse my grades were irreparable, and the well ran dry. I returned
to Memphis, visited BeeBee, thanked her for her efforts, and told her I loved her. She told
me to find a job.
At the time Wilson Caudle’s sister lived in Memphis, and through the course of things
this lady met BeeBee at one of those hot tea drinkers’ parties. After a few phone calls
back and forth, I was packed and headed to Clanton, Mississippi, where Spot was eagerly
waiting. After an hour of orientation, he turned me loose on Ford County.
In the next edition he ran a sweet little story with a photo of me announcing my
“internship” at the Times. It made the front page. News was slow in those days.
The announcement contained two horrendous errors that would haunt me for years. The
first and less serious was the fact that Syracuse had now joined the Ivy League, at least
according to Spot. He informed his dwindling readership that I had received my Ivy
League education at Syracuse. It was a month before anyone mentioned this to me. I was
beginning to believe that no one read the paper, or, worse, those who did were complete
idiots.
The second misstatement changed my life. I was born Joyner William Traynor. Until I
was twelve I hammered my parents with inquiries about why two supposedly intelligent
people would stick Joyner on a newborn. The story finally leaked that one of my parents,
both of whom denied responsibility, had insisted on Joyner as an olive branch to some
feuding relative who allegedly had money. I never met the man, my namesake. He died
broke as far as I was concerned, but I nonetheless had Joyner for a lifetime. When I
enrolled at Syracuse I was J. William, a rather imposing name for an eighteen-year-old.
But Vietnam and the riots and all the rebellion and social upheaval convinced me that J.
William sounded too corporate, too establishment. I became Will.
Spot at various times called me Will, William, Bill, or even Billy, and since I would
answer to all of them I never knew what was next. In the announcement, under my
smiling face, was my new name. Willie Traynor. I was horrified. I had never dreamed of
anyone calling me Willie. I went to a prep school in Memphis and then to college in New
York, and I had never met a person named Willie. I wasn’t a good ole boy. I drove a
Triumph Spitfire and had long hair.
What would I tell my fraternity brothers at Syracuse? What would I tell BeeBee?
After hiding in my apartment for two days, I mustered the courage to confront Spot and
demand he do something. I wasn’t sure what, but he’d made the mistake and he could
damned well fix it. I marched into the Times office and bumped into Davey Bigmouth
Bass, the sports editor of the paper. “Hey, cool name,” he said. I followed him into his
office, seeking advice.
“My name’s not Willie,” I said.
“It is now.”
“My name’s Will.”
“They’ll love you around here. A smart-ass from up North with long hair and a little
imported sports car. Hell, folks’ll think you’re pretty cool with a name like Willie. Think
of Joe Willie.”
“Who’s Joe Willie?”
“Joe Willie Namath.”
“Oh him.”
“Yeah, he’s a Yankee like you, from Pennsylvania or some place, but when he got to
Alabama he went from Joseph William to Joe Willie. The girls chased him all over the
place.”
I began to feel better. In 1970, Joe Namath was probably the most famous athlete in the
country. I went for a drive and kept repeating “Willie.” Within a couple of weeks the
name was beginning to stick. Everybody called me Willie and seemed to feel more
comfortable because I had such a down-to-earth name.
I told BeeBee it was just a temporary pseudonym.
* * *
The Times was a very thin paper, and I knew immediately that it was in trouble. Heavy
on the obits, light on news and advertising. The employees were disgruntled, but quiet
and loyal. Jobs were scarce in Ford County in 1970. After a week it was obvious even to
my novice eyes that the paper was operating at a loss. Obits are free—ads are not. Spot
spent most of his time in his cluttered office, napping periodically and calling the funeral
home. Sometimes they called him. Sometimes the families would stop just hours after
Uncle Wilber’s last breath and hand over a long, flowery, handwritten narrative that Spot
would seize and carry delicately to his desk. Behind a locked door, he would write, edit,
research, and rewrite until it was perfect.
He told me the entire county was mine to cover. The paper had one other general reporter,
Baggy Suggs, a pickled old goat who spent his hours hanging around the courthouse
across the street sniffing for gossip and drinking bourbon with a small club of washed-up
lawyers too old and too drunk to practice anymore. As I would soon learn, Baggy was too
lazy to check sources and dig for anything interesting, and it was not unusual for his front
page story to be some dull account of a boundary dispute or a wife beating.
Margaret, the secretary, was a fine Christian lady who ran the place, though she was
smart enough to allow Spot to think he was the boss. She was in her early fifties and had
worked there for twenty years. She was the rock, the anchor, and everything at the Times
revolved around her. Margaret was soft-spoken, almost shy, and from day one was
completely intimidated by me because I was from Memphis and had gone to school up
North for five years. I was careful not to wear my Ivy Leagueness on my shoulder, but at
the same time I wanted these rural Mississippians to know that I had been superbly
educated.
She and I became gossiping pals, and after a week she confirmed what I already
suspected—that Mr. Caudle was indeed crazy, and that the newspaper was indeed in dire
financial straits. But, she said, the Caudles have family money!
It would be years before I understood this mystery.
In Mississippi, family money was not to be confused with wealth. It had nothing to do
with cash or other assets. Family money was a status, obtained by someone who was
white, somewhat educated beyond high school, born in a large home with a front porch—
preferably one surrounded by cotton or soybean fields, although this was not
mandatory—and partially reared by a beloved black maid named Bessie or Pearl,
partially reared by doting grandparents who once owned the ancestors of Bessie or Pearl,
and lectured from birth on the stringent social graces of a privileged people. Acreage and
trust funds helped somewhat, but Mississippi was full of insolvent blue bloods who
inherited the status of family money. It could not be earned. It had to be handed down at
birth.
