When I talked to the Caudle family lawyer, he explained, rather succinctly, the real value
of their family money. “They’re as poor as Job’s turkey,” he said as I sat deep in a worn
leather chair and looked up at him across his wide and ancient mahogany desk. His name
was Walter Sullivan, of the prestigious Sullivan & O’Hara firm. Prestigious for Ford
County—seven lawyers. He studied the bankruptcy petition and rambled on about the
Caudles and the money they used to have and how foolish they’d been in running a once
profitable paper into the ground. He’d represented them for thirty years, and back when
Miss Emma ran things the Times had five thousand subscribers and pages filled with
advertisements. She kept a $500,000 certificate of deposit at Security Bank, just for a
rainy day.
Then her husband died, and she remarried a local alcoholic twenty years her junior. When
sober, he was semiliterate and fancied himself as a tortured poet and essayist. Miss Emma
loved him dearly and installed him as coeditor, a position he used to write long editorials
blasting everything that moved in Ford County. It was the beginning of the end. Spot
hated his new stepfather, the feelings were mutual, and their relationship finally climaxed
with one of the more colorful fistfights in the history of downtown Clanton. It took place
on the sidewalk in front of the Times office, on the downtown square, in front of a large
and stunned crowd. The locals believed that Spot’s brain, already fragile, took additional
damage that day. Shortly thereafter, he began writing nothing but those damned
obituaries.
The stepfather ran off with her money, and Miss Emma, heartbroken, become a recluse.
“It was once a fine paper,” Mr. Sullivan said. “But look at it now. Less than twelve
hundred subscriptions, heavily in debt. Bankrupt.”
“What will the court do?” I asked.
“Try and find a buyer.”
“A buyer?”
“Yes, someone will buy. The county has to have a newspaper.”
I immediately thought of two people—Nick Diener and BeeBee. Nick’s family had
become rich off their county weekly. BeeBee was already loaded and she had only one
beloved grandchild. My heart began pounding as I smelled opportunity.
Mr. Sullivan watched me intently, and it was obvious he knew what I was thinking. “It
could be bought for a song,” he said.
“How much?” I asked with all the confidence of a twenty-three-year-old cub reporter
whose grandmother was as stout as lye soap.
“Probably fifty thousand. Twenty-five for the paper, twenty-five to operate. Most of the
debts can be bankrupted, then renegotiated with the creditors you need.” He paused and
leaned forward, elbows on his desk, thick grayish eyebrows twitching as if his brain was
working overtime. “It could be a real gold mine, you know.”
* * *
BeeBee had never invested in a gold mine, but after three days of priming the pump I left
Memphis with a check for $50,000. I gave it to Mr. Sullivan, who put it in a trust account
and petitioned the court for the sale of the paper. The Judge, a relic who belonged in the
bed next to Miss Emma, nodded benignly and scrawled his name on an order that made
me the new owner of The Ford County Times.
It takes at least three generations to be accepted in Ford County. Regardless of money or
breeding, one cannot simply move there and be trusted. A dark cloud of suspicion hangs
over any newcomer, and I was no exception. The people there are exceedingly warm and
gracious and polite, almost to the point of being nosy with their friendliness. They nod
and speak to everyone on the downtown streets. They ask about your health, the weather,
and they invite you to church. They rush to help strangers.
Hut they don’t really trust you unless they trusted your grandfather.
Once word spread that I, a young green alien from Memphis, had bought the paper for
fifty, or maybe a hundred, or perhaps even two hundred thousand dollars, a great wave of
gossip shook the community. Margaret gave me the updates. Because I was single, there
was a chance I was a homosexual. Because I went to Syracuse, wherever that was, then I
was probably a Communist. Or worse, a liberal. Because I was from Memphis, I was a
subversive intent on embarrassing Ford County.
Just the same, as they all conceded quietly among themselves, I now controlled the
obituaries! I was somebody!
The new Times debuted on March 18, 1970, only three weeks after the midget arrived
with his papers. It was almost an inch thick and loaded with more photos than had ever
been published in a county weekly. Cub Scout troops, Brownies, junior high basketball
teams, garden clubs, book clubs, tea clubs, Bible study groups, adult softball teams, civic
clubs. Dozens of photos. I tried to include every living soul in the county. And the dead
ones were exhalted like never before. The obits were embarrassingly long. I’m sure Spot
was proud, but I never heard from him.
The news was light and breezy. Absolutely no editorials. People love to read about crime,
so on the bottom left-hand corner of the front page I launched the Crime Notes Section.
Thankfully, two pickups had been stolen the week before, and I covered these heists as if
Fort Knox had been looted.
In the center of the front page there was a rather large group shot of the new regime—
Margaret, Hardy, Baggy Suggs, me, our photographer, Wiley Meek, Davey Bigmouth
Bass, and Melanie Dogan, a high school student and part-time employee. I was proud of
my staff. We had worked around the clock for ten days, and our first edition was a great
success. We printed five thousand copies and sold them all. I sent a box of them to
BeeBee, and she was most impressed.
For the next month, the new Times slowly took shape as I struggled to determine what I
wanted it to become. Change is painful in rural Mississippi, so I decided to do it
gradually. The old paper was bankrupt, but it had changed little in fifty years. I wrote
more news, sold more ads, included more and more pictures of groups of endless
varieties. And I worked hard on the obituaries.
I had never been attracted to long hours, but since I was the owner I forgot about the
clock. I was too young and too busy to be scared. I was twenty-three, and through luck
and timing and a rich grandmother, I was suddenly the owner of a weekly newspaper. If I
had hesitated and studied the situation, and sought advice from bankers and accountants,
I’m sure someone would have talked some sense into me. But when you’re twenty-three,
you’re fearless. You have nothing, so there’s nothing to lose.
I figured it would take a year to become profitable. And, at first, revenue increased
slowly. Then Rhoda Kassellaw was murdered. I guess it’s the nature of the business to
sell more papers after a brutal crime when people want details. We sold twenty-four
hundred papers the week before her death, and almost four thousand the week after.
It was no ordinary murder.
* * *