Ford County was a peaceful place, filled with people who were either Christians or
claimed to be. Fistfights were common, but they were usually the work of the lower
classes who hung around beer joints and such. Once a month a redneck would take a shot
at a neighbor or perhaps his own wife, and each weekend had at least one stabbing in the
black tonks. Death rarely followed these episodes.
I owned the paper for ten years, from 1970 to 1980, and we reported very few murders in
Ford County. None was as brutal as Rhoda Kassellaw’s; none was as premeditated.
Thirty years later, I still think about it every day.
Chapter 2
Rhoda Kassellaw lived in the Beech Hill community, twelve miles north of Clanton, in a
modest gray brick house on a narrow, paved country road. The flower beds along the
front of the house were weedless and received daily care, and between them and the road
the long wide lawn was thick and well cut. The driveway was crushed white rock.
Scattered down both sides of it was a collection of scooters and balls and bikes. Her two
small children were always outdoors, playing hard, sometimes stopping to watch a
passing car.
It was a pleasant little country house, a stone’s throw from Mr. and Mrs. Deece next door.
The young man who bought it was killed in a trucking accident somewhere in Texas, and,
at the age of twenty-eight, Rhoda became a widow. The insurance on his life paid off the
house and the car. The balance was invested to provide a modest monthly income that
allowed her to remain home and dote on the children. She spent hours outside, tending
her vegetable garden, potting flowers, pulling weeds, mulching the beds along the front
of the house.
She kept to herself. The old ladies in Beech Hill considered her a model widow, staying
home, looking sad, limiting her social appearances to an occasional visit to church. She
should attend more regularly, they whispered.
Shortly after the death of her husband, Rhoda planned to return to her family in Missouri.
She was not from Ford County, nor was her husband. A job took them there. But the
house was paid for, the kids were happy, the neighbors were nice, and her family was
much too concerned about how much life insurance she’d collected. So she stayed,
always thinking of leaving but never doing so.
Rhoda Kassellaw was a beautiful woman when she wanted to be, which was not very
often. Her shapely, thin figure was usually camouflaged under a loose cotton drip-dry
dress, or a bulky chambray workshirt, which she preferred when gardening. She wore
little makeup and kept her long flaxen-colored hair pulled back and stuck together on top
of her head. Most of what she ate came from her organic garden, and her skin had a soft
healthy glow to it. Such an attractive young widow would normally have been a hot
property in the county, but she kept to herself.
After three years of mourning, however, Rhoda became restless. She was not getting
younger; the years were slipping by. She was too young and too pretty to sit at home
every Saturday and read bedtime stories. There had to be some action out there, though
there was certainly none in Beech Hill.
She hired a young black girl from down the road to baby-sit, and Rhoda drove north for
an hour to the Tennessee line, where she’d heard there were some respectable lounges
and dance clubs. Maybe no one would know her there. She enjoyed the dancing and the
flirting, but she never drank and always came home early. It became a routine, two or
three times a month.
Then the jeans got tighter, the dancing faster, the hours longer and longer. She was
getting noticed and talked about in the bars and clubs along the state line.
He followed her home twice before he killed her. It was March, and a warm front had
brought a premature hope of spring. It was a dark night, with no moon. Bear, the family
mutt, sniffed him first as he crept behind a tree in the backyard. Bear was primed to
growl and bark when he was forever silenced.
Rhoda’s son Michael was five and her daughter Teresa was three. They wore matching
Disney cartoon pajamas, neatly pressed, and watched their mother’s glowing eyes as she
read them the story of Jonah and the whale. She tucked them in and kissed them good
night, and when Rhoda turned off the light to their bedroom, he was already in the house.
An hour later she turned off the television, locked the doors, and waited for Bear, who
did not appear. That was no surprise because he often chased rabbits and squirrels into
the woods and came home late. Bear would sleep on the back porch and wake her
howling at dawn. In her bedroom, she slipped out of her light cotton dress and opened the
closet door. He was waiting in there, in the dark.
He snatched her from behind, covered her mouth with a thick and sweaty hand, and said,
“I have a knife. I’ll cut you and your kids.” With the other hand he held up a shiny blade
and waved it before her eyes.
“Understand?” he hissed into her ear.
She trembled and managed to shake her head. She couldn’t see what he looked like. He
threw her to the floor of the cluttered closet, face down, and yanked her hands behind her.
He took a brown wool scarf an old aunt had given her and wrapped it roughly around her
face. “Not one sound,” he kept growling at her. “Or I’ll cut your kids.” When the
blindfold was finished he grabbed her hair, snatched her to her feet, and dragged her to
her bed. He poked the tip of the blade into her chin and said, “Don’t fight me. The knife’s
right here.” He cut off her panties and the rape began.
He wanted to see her eyes, those beautiful eyes he’d seen in the clubs. And the long hair.
He’d bought her drinks and danced with her twice, and when he’d finally made a move
she had stiff-armed him. Try these moves, baby, he mumbled just loud enough for her to
hear.
He and the Jack Daniel’s had been building courage for three hours, and now the whiskey
numbed him. He moved slowly above her, not rushing things, enjoying every second of it.
He mumbled in the self-satisfying grunts of a real man taking and getting what he wanted.
The smell of the whiskey and his sweat nauseated her, but she was too frightened to
throw up. It might anger him, cause him to use the knife. As she started to accept the
horror of the moment, she began to think. Keep it quiet. Don’t wake up the kids. And
what will he do with the knife when he’s finished?
His movements were faster, he was mumbling louder. “Quiet, baby,” he hissed again and
again. “I’ll use the knife.” The wrought-iron bed was squeaking; didn’t get used enough,
he told himself. Too much noise, but he didn’t care.
The rattling of the bed woke Michael, who then got Teresa up. They eased from their
room and crept down the dark hall to see what was happening. Michael opened the door
to his mother’s bedroom, saw the strange man on top of her, and said, “Mommy!” For a
second the man stopped and jerked his head toward the children.
The sound of the boy’s voice horrified Rhoda, who bolted upward and thrust both hands
at her assailant, grabbing whatever she could. One small fist caught him in the left eye, a
solid shot that stunned him. Then she yanked off her blindfold while kicking with both
legs. He slapped her and tried to pin her down again. “Danny Padgitt!” she shouted, still
clawing. He hit her once more.
“Mommy!” Michael cried.
“Run, kids!” Rhoda tried to scream, but she was struck dumb by her assailant’s blows.
“Shut up!” Padgitt yelled.
“Run!” Rhoda shouted again, and the children backed away, then darted down the
hallway, into the kitchen, and outside to safety.
In the split second after she shouted his name, Padgitt realized he had no choice but to
silence her. He took the knife and hacked twice, then scrambled from the bed and
grabbed his clothing.
* * *
