
Mr. and Mrs. Aaron Deece were watching late television from Memphis when they heard
Michael’s voice calling and getting closer. Mr. Deece met the boy at the front door. His
pajamas were soaked with sweat and dew and his teeth were chattering so violently he
had trouble speaking. “He hurt my mommy!” he kept saying. “He hurt my mommy!”
Through the darkness between the two houses, Mr. Deece saw Teresa running after her
brother. She was almost running in place, as if she wanted to get to one place without
leaving the other. When Mrs. Deece finally got to her by the Deece garage, she was
sucking her thumb and unable to speak.
Mr. Deece raced into his den and grabbed two shotguns, one for him, one for his wife.
The children were in the kitchen, shocked to the point of being paralyzed. “He hurt
Mommy,” Michael kept saying. Mrs. Deece cuddled them, told them everything would
be fine. She looked at her shotgun when her husband laid it on the table. “Stay here,” he
said as he rushed out of the house.
He did not go far. Rhoda almost made it to the Deece home before she collapsed in the
wet grass. She was completely naked, and from the neck down covered in blood. He
picked her up and carried her to the front porch, then shouted at his wife to move the
children toward the back of the house and lock them in a bedroom. He could not allow
them to see their mother in her last moments.
As he placed her in the swing, Rhoda whispered, “Danny Padgitt. It was Danny Padgitt.”
He covered her with a quilt, then called an ambulance.
* * *
Danny Padgitt kept his pickup in the center of the road and drove ninety miles an hour.
He was half-drunk and scared as hell but unwilling to admit it. He’d be home in ten
minutes, secure in the family’s little kingdom known as Padgitt Island.
Those little faces had ruined everything. He’d think about it tomorrow. He took a long
pull on the fifth of Jack Daniel’s and felt better.
It was a rabbit or a small dog or some varmint, and when it darted from the shoulder he
caught a glimpse of it and reacted badly. He instinctively hit the brake pedal, just for a
split second because he really didn’t care what he hit and rather enjoyed the sport of
roadkilling, but he’d punched too hard. The rear tires locked and the pickup fishtailed.
Before he realized it Danny was in serious trouble. He jerked the wheel one way, the
wrong way, and the truck hit the gravel shoulder where it began to spin like a stock car
on the backstretch. It slid into the ditch, flipped twice, then crashed into a row of pine
trees. If he’d been sober he would’ve been killed, but drunks walk away.
He crawled out through a shattered window, and for a long while leaned on the truck,
counting his cuts and scratches and considering his options. A leg was suddenly stiff, and
as he climbed up the bank to the road he realized he could not walk far. Not that he would
need to.
The blue lights were on him before he realized it. The deputy was out of the car,
surveying the scene with a long black flashlight. More flashing lights appeared down the
road.
The deputy saw the blood, smelled the whiskey, and reached for the handcuffs.
Chapter 3
The Big Brown River drops nonchalantly south from Tennessee and runs as straight as a
hand-dug channel for thirty miles through the center of Tyler County, Mississippi. Two
miles above the Ford County line it begins twisting and looping, and by the time it leaves
Tyler County it looks like a scared snake, curling desperately and going nowhere. Its
water is thick and heavy, muddy and slow, shallow in most places. The Big Brown is not
known for its beauty. Sand, silt, and gravel bars line its innumerable bends and curves. A
hundred sloughs and creeks feed it with an inexhaustible supply of slow-moving water.
Its journey through Ford County is brief. It dips and forms a wide circle around two
thousand acres in the northeasternmost corner of the county, then leaves and heads back
toward Tennessee. The circle is almost perfect and an island is almost formed, but at the
last moment the Big Brown turns away from itself and leaves a narrow strip of land
between its banks.
The circle is known as Padgitt Island, a deep, dense woodland covered in pine, gum, elm,
oak, and a myriad of swamps and bayous and sloughs, some connected but most isolated.
Little of the rich soil had ever been cleared. Nothing was harvested on the island except
timber and lots of corn for illegal whiskey. And marijuana, but that was a later story.
On the thin strip of land between the banks of the Big Brown a paved road entered and
left, came and went, always with someone watching. The road was built long ago by the
county, but very few taxpayers ever dared to use it.
The entire island had been in the Padgitt family since Reconstruction, when Rudolph
Padgitt, a carpetbagger from the North, arrived a bit late after the War and found all the
prime land taken. He searched in vain, found nothing attractive, then somehow stumbled
upon the snake-infested island. On the map, it looked promising. He put together a band
of newly freed slaves and, with guns and machetes, fought his way onto the island. No
one else wanted it.
Rudolph married a local whore and began cutting timber. Since timber was in great
demand after the War, he became prosperous. The local proved to be quite fertile and
soon there was a horde of little Padgitts on the island. One of his ex-slaves had learned
the art of distillery. Rudolph became a corn farmer who neither ate nor sold his crop, but
instead used it to produce what was soon known as one of the finest whiskeys in the Deep
South.
