For thirty years Rudolph made moonshine until he died of cirrhosis in 1902. By then an
entire clan of Padgitts inhabited the island, and were quite proficient at milling timber
and producing illegal whiskey. Scattered about the island were half a dozen distilleries,
all well protected and concealed, all operating with state-of-the-art machinery.
The Padgitts were famous for their whiskey, though fame was not something they sought.
They were secretive and clannish, fiercely private and deathly afraid that someone might
infiltrate their little kingdom and disrupt their considerable profits. They said they were
loggers, and it was well known that they produced timber and were prosperous at it. The
Padgitt Lumber Company was very visible on the main highway near the river. They
claimed to be legitimate people, taxpayers and such, with their children in the public
schools.
During the 1920s and 1930s, when alcohol was illegal and the nation was thirsty, Padgitt
whiskey could not be distilled fast enough. It was shipped in oak barrels across the Big
Brown and hauled by trucks up North, as far away as Chicago. The patriarch, president,
and director of production and marketing was a tight-fisted old warrior named Clovis
Padgitt, eldest son of Rudolph and the local. Clovis had been taught at an early age that
the best profits were those from which no taxes were extracted. That was lesson number
one. Number two preached the marvelous message of dealing strictly in cash. Clovis was
a hard-nosed cash and no-taxes man, and the Padgitts were rumored to have more money
than the Mississippi state treasury.
In 1938, three revenue agents sneaked across the Big Brown in a rented flatboat in search
of the source of Old Padgitt. Their covert invasion of the island was flawed in many ways,
the obvious being the original idea itself. But for some reason they chose midnight as
their hour to cross the river. They were dismembered and buried in deep graves.
In 1943, a strange event occurred in Ford County—an honest man was elected Sheriff. Or
High Sheriff, as he is commonly known. His name was Koonce Lantrip, and he wasn’t
really that honest but certainly sounded good on the stump. He vowed to end corruption,
to clean up county government, to put the bootleggers and moonshiners, even the Padgitts,
out of business. It made for a nice speech and Lantrip won by eight votes.
His supporters waited and waited, and, finally, six months after taking office he
organized his deputies and crossed the Big Brown on the only bridge, an ancient wooden
structure that had been built by the county in 1915 at the insistence of Clovis. The
Padgitts sometimes used it in the springtime when the river was high. No one else was
allowed to cross it.
Two of the deputies were shot in the head, and Lantrip’s body was never found. It was
carefully laid to rest on the banks of a swamp by three Padgitt Negroes. Buford, the eldest
son of Clovis, supervised the burial.
The massacre was hot news in Mississippi for weeks, and the Governor threatened to
send in the National Guard. But the Second War was raging, and D-Day soon captured
the attention of the country. There wasn’t much left of the National Guard anyway, and
those who were able to light had little interest in attacking Padgitt Island. The beaches of
Normandy would be more inviting.
With the noble experiment of an honest Sheriff behind them, the good people of Ford
County elected one from the old school. His name was Mackey Don Coley and his father
had been the High Sheriff back in the twenties when Clovis was in charge of Padgitt
Island. Clovis and the senior Coley had been rather close, and it was widely known that
the Sheriff was a rich man because Old Padgitt was allowed to move so freely out of the
county. When Mackey Don announced his candidacy, Buford sent him $50,000 in cash.
Mackey Don won in a landslide. His opponent claimed to be honest.
There was a widely held but unprofessed belief in Mississippi that a good Sheriff must be
a little crooked to ensure law and order. Whiskey, whoring, and gambling were simply
facts of life, and a good Sheriff must be knowledgeable in these affairs to properly
regulate them and protect the Christians. Those vices could not be eliminated, so the High
Sheriff must be able to coordinate them and synchronize the orderly flow of sin. For his
coordinating efforts, he was to be paid a little extra from the purveyors of such
wickedness. He expected it. Most of the voters expected it. No honest man could live on
such a humble salary. No honest man could move quietly through the shadows of the
underworld.
For the better part of a hundred years following the Civil War, the Padgitts owned the
Sheriffs of Ford County. They bought them outright with sacks of cash. Mackey Don
Coley received a hundred thousand a year (it was rumored), and during election years he
got whatever he needed. And they were generous with other politicians. They quietly
bought and kept influence. They asked little; they just wanted to be left alone on their
island.
After the Second War, the demand for moonshine began a steady decline. Since
generations of Padgitts had been schooled to operate outside the law, Buford and the
family began to diversify into other forms of illicit commerce. Selling only timber was
dull, and subject to too many market factors, and, most important, did not generate the
piles of cash the family expected. They ran guns, stole cars, counterfeited, bought and
burned buildings to collect insurance. For twenty years they operated a highly successful
brothel on the county line, until it mysteriously burned in 1966.
They were creative and energetic people, always scheming and searching for opportunity,
always waiting for someone to rob. There were rumors, quite significant at times, that the
Padgitts were members of the Dixie Mafia, a loose-knit gang of redneck thieves who ran
rampant through the Deep South in the sixties. These rumors were never verified and
were in fact discounted by many because the Padgitts were simply too secretive to share
their business with anyone. Nonetheless, the rumors persisted for years, and the Padgitts
were the source of endless gossip in the cafes and coffee shops around the square in
Clanton. They were never considered local heroes, but certainly legends.
In 1967, a younger Padgitt fled to Canada to avoid the draft. He drifted to California
where he tried marijuana and realized he had a taste for it. After a few months as a
peacenik, he got homesick and sneaked back to Padgitt Island. He brought with him four
pounds of pot, which he shared with all his cousins, and they, too, were quite taken with
it. He explained that the rest of the country, and primarily California, was toking like
crazy. As usual, Mississippi was at least five years behind the trend.
The stuff could be grown cheaply, then hauled to the cities where there was demand. His
father, Gill Padgitt, grandson of Clovis, saw the opportunity, and soon many of the old
cornfields were converted to cannabis. A two-thousand-foot strip of land was cleared for
a runway and the Padgitts bought themselves an airplane. Within a year there were daily
flights to the outskirts of Memphis and Atlanta, where the Padgitts had established their
network. To their delight and with their help, marijuana finally became popular in the
Deep South.
The moonshining slowed considerably. The brothel was gone. The Padgitts had contacts
in Miami and Mexico and the cash was coming in by the truckloads. For years, no one in
Ford County had a hint that the Padgitts were trafficking in drugs. And they never got
caught. No Padgitt was ever indicted for a drug-related offense.
In fact, not a single Padgitt had ever been arrested. A hundred years of moonshining,
stealing, gunrunning, gambling, counterfeiting, whoring, bribing, even killing, and
eventually drug manufacturing, and not a single arrest. They were smart people, careful,
deliberate, patient with their schemes.
Then Danny Padgitt, Gill’s youngest son, was arrested for the rape and murder of Rhoda
Kassellaw.
Mr. Deece told me the next day that when he was certain Rhoda was dead he finally left
her in the swing on the front porch. He went to his bathroom, where he stripped and
showered and saw her blood spin down the drain. He changed into work clothes and
waited for the police and the ambulance. He watched her house while holding a loaded
shotgun, anxious to blast anything that moved. But there was no movement, no sound. In
the distance he could barely hear a siren.
His wife kept the children locked in the back bedroom, where she huddled with them in
the bed, under a blanket. Michael kept asking about his mother, and who was that man?
But Teresa was too traumatized to speak. She managed only a low groaning sound as she
sucked her fingers and shook as if she were freezing.
Before long Benning Road was alive with red and blue flashing lights. Rhoda’s body was
photographed at length before it was taken away. Her home was cordoned off by a squad
of deputies, led by Sheriff Coley himself. Mr. Deece, still holding his shotgun, gave his
statement to an investigator, then to the Sheriff.
Shortly after 2 A.M… a deputy arrived with the news that a doctor in town had been
notified and had suggested that the children be brought in for a look. They rode in the
backseat of a patrol car, Michael clutching Mr. Deece, and Teresa in the lap of his wife.
At the hospital, they were given a mild sedative and placed together in a semiprivate
room where the nurses brought them cookies and milk until they finally went to sleep.
Later in the day an aunt arrived from Missouri and took them away.
* * *

