My phone rang seconds before midnight. It was Wiley Meek, the paper’s photographer.
He’d picked up the story on the police scanner and was already hanging around the jail
waiting to ambush the suspect. Cops were everywhere, he said, his excitement barely
under control. Hurry, he urged me. This could be the big one.
At the time I lived above an old garage next to a decaying but still grand Victorian
mansion known as the Hocutt House. It was filled with elderly Hocutts, three sisters and
a brother, and they took turns being my landlord. Their five-acre estate was a few blocks
from the Clanton square and had been built a century earlier with family money. It was
covered with trees, overgrown flower beds, thick patches of mature weeds, and enough
animals to stock a game preserve. Rabbits, squirrels, skunks, possums, raccoons, a
million birds, a frightening assortment of green and black snakes—all nonpoisonous I
was reassured—and dozens of cats. But no dogs. The Hocutts hated dogs. Each cat had a
name, and a major clause in my verbal lease was that I would respect the cats.
Respect them I did. The four-room loft apartment was spacious and clean and cost me the
ridiculous sum of $50 a month. If they wanted their cats respected at that price, fine with
me.
Their father, Miles Hocutt, had been an eccentric doctor in Clan-ton for decades. Their
mother died during childbirth, and, according to local legend, Dr. Hocutt became very
possessive of the children after her death. To protect them from the world, he concocted
one of the biggest lies ever told in Ford County. He explained to his children that insanity
ran deeply in the family, and thus they should never marry lest they produce some
hideous strain of idiot offspring. His children worshiped him, believed him, and were
probably already exposed to some measure of unbalance. They never married. The son,
Max Hocutt, was eighty-one when he leased me the apartment. The twins, Wilma and
Gilma, were seventy-seven, and Melberta, the baby, was seventy-three and completely
out of her mind.
It was Gilma, I think, who was peeking from the kitchen window as I descended the
wooden stairway at midnight. A cat was asleep on the bottom step, directly in my path,
but I respectfully stepped over it. I wanted to kick it into the street.
Two cars were parked in the garage. One was my Spitfire, top up to keep the cats out, and
the other was a long, shiny black Mercedes with red-and-white butcher knives painted on
the doors. Under the knives were phone numbers in green paint. Someone had once told
Mr. Max Hocutt that he could completely write off the cost of a new car, any car, if he
used it for business and some sort of logo was painted on the doors. He bought a new
Mercedes and became a knife sharpener. He said his tools were in the trunk.
The car was ten years old and had been driven less than eight thousand miles. Their
father had also preached to them the sinfulness of women driving, so Mr. Max was the
chauffeur.
I eased the Spitfire down the gravel drive and waved at Gilma peeking from behind the
curtain. She jerked her head away and disappeared. The jail was six blocks away. I had
slept for about thirty minutes.
Danny Padgitt was being fingerprinted when I arrived. The Sheriff’s office was in the
front section of the jail, and it was packed with deputies and reserves and volunteer
firemen and everybody with access to a uniform and a police scanner. Wiley Meek met
me on the front sidewalk.
“It’s Danny Padgitt!” he said with great excitement.
I stopped for a second and tried to think. “Who?”
“Danny Padgitt, from the island.”
I’d been in Ford County less than three months and had yet to meet a single Padgitt. They,
as always, kept to themselves. But I’d heard various installments of their legend, with
much more to follow. Telling Padgitt stories was a common form of entertainment in
Ford County.
Wiley gushed on, “I got some great shots just as they got him out of the car. Had blood
all over him. Great pictures! The girl’s dead!”
“What girl?”
“The one he killed. Raped her too, at least that’s the rumor.”
Danny Padgitt, I mumbled to myself as the sensational story began to sink in. I had my
first glimpse of the headline, no doubt the boldest one the Times had run in many years.
Poor old Spot had shied away from the jolting stories. Poor old Spot had gone bankrupt. I
had other plans.
We pushed our way inside and looked around for Sheriff Coley. I’d met him twice during
my brief stint with the Times and I had been impressed with his polite and warm nature.
He called me mister and said sir and ma’am to everyone, always with a smile. He’d been
the Sheriff since the massacre in 1943, so he was pushing seventy years of age. He was
tall and gaunt without the obligatory thick stomach required of most Southern sheriffs.
On the surface he was a gentleman, and both times I’d met him I’d later wondered how
such a nice man could be so corrupt. He emerged from a back room with a deputy, and I,
practicing my assertive-ness, rushed to him.
“Sheriff, just a couple of questions,” I said sternly. There were no other reporters present.
His boys—the real deputies, the part-timers, the wannabes, the jackleg constables with
homemade uniforms—they all got quiet and gave me their sneers. I was still very much
the brash new rich boy who’d somehow wrangled control of their newspaper. I was a
foreigner, with no right to barge in at a time like this and start asking questions.
Sheriff Coley smiled as usual, as if these encounters happened all the time around
midnight. “Yes sir, Mr. Traynor.” He had a slow rich drawl that was very soothing. This
man couldn’t tell a lie, could he?
“What can you tell us about the murder?”
With his arms folded across his chest, he gave a few of the basics in copspeak. “While
female, age thirty-one, was attacked in her home on Benning Road. Raped, stabbed,
murdered. Can’t give you her name until we talk to her kinfolks.”
“And you’ve made an arrest?”
“Yes sir, but no details now. Just give us a couple of hours. We’re investigatin’. That’s all,
Mr. Traynor.”
“Rumor has it that you have Danny Padgitt in custody.”
“I don’t deal in rumors, Mr. Traynor. Not in my profession. Yours neither.”
Wiley and I drove to the hospital, sniffed around for an hour, heard nothing we could
print, then drove to the scene on Benning Road. The cops had cordoned off the house and
a few of the neighbors were huddled quietly behind a strand of yellow police ribbon near
the mailbox. We eased next to them, listening intently, hearing almost nothing. They
seemed too stunned to talk. After a few minutes of gawking at the house, we crept away.
Wiley had a nephew who was a part-time deputy, and we found him guarding the Deece
home where they were still inspecting the front porch and the swing where Rhoda took
her last breath. We pulled him off to the side, behind a row of Mr. Deece’s crepe myrtles,
and he told us everything. All off the record, of course, as if the gory details would
somehow be kept quiet in Ford County.
* * *
There were three small cafes around the square in Clanton, two for the whites, one for the
blacks. Wiley suggested we get an early table and just listen.
I do not eat breakfast, and I’m usually not awake during the hours in which it is served. I
don’t mind working until midnight, but I prefer to sleep until the sun is overhead and in
full view. As I quickly realized, one of the advantages of owning a small weekly was that
I could work late and sleep late. The stories could be written anytime, as long as the
deadlines were met. Spot himself was known to drift in not long before noon, after, of
course, dropping by the funeral home. I liked his hours.
The second day I lived in my apartment above the Hocutt garage, Gilma banged on my
door at nine-thirty in the morning. And banged and banged. I finally staggered through
my small kitchen in my underwear and saw her squinting through the blinds. She
announced that she was just about to call the police. The other Hocutts were down below,
wandering around the garage, looking at my car, certain that a crime had been committed.
She asked what I was doing. I said that I had been sleeping until I heard somebody
banging on the damned door. She asked me why I was still asleep at nine-thirty on a
Wednesday morning. I rubbed my eyes and tried to think of an appropriate response. I
was suddenly aware that I was almost nude and standing in the presence of a seventyseven-
year-old virgin. She kept looking at my thighs.
They’d been up since five, she explained. Nobody sleeps till nine-thirty in Clanton. Was I
drunk? They were just concerned, that’s all. As I closed the door I told her I was sober,
still sleepy, thanks for being concerned but I would often be in bed past 9 A.M.
I’d been to the Tea Shoppe a couple of times for late morning coffee and once for lunch.
As the owner of the paper, I felt it necessary to circulate and be seen, at a reasonable hour.
I was keenly aware that I would be writing about Ford County, its people and places and
happenings, for years to come.
Wiley said the cafes would be crowded early. “Always after football games and car
wrecks,” he said.
“What about murders?” I asked.
“It’s been a long time,” he said.
He was right, the place was packed when we walked in, just after 6 A.M. He offered
some hellos, shook some hands, exchanged a couple of insults. He was from Ford County
and knew everyone. I nodded and smiled and caught the odd looks. It would take years.
The people were friendly, but also wary of outsiders.
We found two scats at the counter and I asked for coffee. Nothing else. The waitress did
not approve of this. She warmed to Wiley, though, when he reconsidered and ordered
scrambled eggs, country ham, biscuits, grits, and a side of hash browns, enough
cholesterol to choke a mule.
