The talk was of the rape and murder and nothing else. If the weather could cause
arguments, imagine what such a heinous crime could stir up. The Padgitts had had the run
of the county for a hundred years; it was time to send ‘em all to jail. Surround the island
with the National Guard if necessary. Mackey Don had to go; he’d been in their pockets
for too long. Let a bunch of crooks run free and they think they’re above the law. Now
this.
Not much was said about Rhoda because little was known. Someone knew she’d been
hanging around the lounges on the state line. Someone said she’d been sleeping with a
local lawyer. Didn’t know his name. Just a rumor.
The rumors roared around the Tea Shoppe. A couple of the loudmouths took turns
holding court, and I was surprised at how reckless they were with their versions of the
truth. Too bad I couldn’t print all the wonderful gossip we heard.
Chapter 5
We did, however, print a lot. The headline proclaimed that Rhoda Kassellaw had been
raped and murdered, and that Danny Padgitt had been arrested for it. The headline
could’ve been read from twenty yards down any sidewalk around the courthouse square.
Under it were two photos; one of Rhoda as a senior in high school, and one of Padgitt as
he was led into the jail in handcuffs. Wiley had ambushed him all right. It was a perfect
shot, with Padgitt sneering at the camera. There was blood on his forehead from the
wreck, and blood on his shirt from the attack. He looked nasty, mean, insolent, drunk,
and guilty as hell, and I knew the photo would cause a sensation. Wiley thought we’d
better avoid it, but I was twenty-three years old and too young to be restrained. I wanted
my readers to see and know the ugly truth. I wanted to sell newspapers.
The photo of Rhoda had been obtained from a sister in Missouri. The first time I talked to
her, by phone, she had had almost nothing to say and quickly hung up. The second time
she thawed just a little, said the children were being seen by a doctor, that the funeral
would take place Tuesday afternoon in a small town near Springfield, and, as far as the
family was concerned, the entire state of Mississippi could burn in hell.
I told her that I understood completely, that I was from Syracuse, that I was one of the
good guys. She finally agreed to send me a photo.
Using a host of unnamed sources, I described in detail what happened the previous
Saturday night on Benning Road. When I was sure of a fact, I drove it home. When I
wasn’t so sure, I nibbled around the edges with enough innuendo to convey what I
thought happened. Baggy Suggs sobered up long enough to reread and edit the stories. He
probably kept us from getting sued or shot.
On page two there was a map of the crime scene and a large photo of Rhoda’s home, one
taken the morning after the crime, complete with cop cars and yellow police ribbon
everywhere. The photo also included the bikes and toys of Michael and Teresa scattered
around the front yard. In many ways, the photo was more ominous than one of the corpse
itself, which I didn’t have but tried to get. The photo stated plainly that children lived
there, and that children were involved in a crime so brutal that most Ford Countians were
still trying to believe it really happened.
How much did the children see? That was the burning question.
I didn’t answer it in the Times, but I got as close as possible. I described the house and its
interior layout. Using an unnamed source, I estimated that the children’s beds were about
thirty feet from their mother’s. The children fled the house before Rhoda, they were in
shock by the time they got next door, they were seen by a doctor in Clanton and were
undergoing therapy of some nature back home in Missouri. They saw a lot.
Would they testify at a trial? Baggy said there was no way; they were simply too young.
But I pulled the question out of the air and posed it anyway, to give the readers something
else to argue and fret over. After exploring the possibility of parading the children into a
courtroom, I concluded that “experts” agreed that such a scenario was unlikely. Baggy
enjoyed being considered an expert.
Rhoda’s obituary was as long as I could possibly make it, which, given the tradition of
the Times, was not unusual.
We went to press about 10 P.M. on Tuesday night; the paper was in the racks around the
Clanton square by 7 A.M. on Wednesday. The circulation had dropped to fewer than
twelve hundred at the time of the bankruptcy, but after a month of my fearless leadership
we had close to twenty-five hundred subscribers—five thousand was a realistic goal.
For the Rhoda Kassellaw murder we printed eight thousand copies and put them
everywhere—by the doors of the cafes around the square, in the halls of the courthouse,
on the desks of every county employee, in the lobbies of the banks. We mailed three
thousand free copies to potential subscribers, as part of a sudden, one-time special
promotion effort.
According to Wiley, it was the first murder in eight years. It was a Padgitt! It was a
wonderfully sensational story and I saw it as my golden moment. Sure I went for the
shock, for the sensational, for the bloodstains. Sure it was yellow journalism, but what
did I care?
I had no idea the response would be so quick and unpleasant.
* * *
At 9 A.M.… Thursday morning, the main courtroom on the second floor of the Ford
County Courthouse was full. It was the domain of the Honorable Reed Loopus, an aging
Circuit Court Judge from Tyler County, who passed through Clanton eight times a year to
dispense justice. He was a legendary old warrior who ruled with an iron fist and,
according to Baggy—who spent most of his working life hanging around the courthouse
either picking up gossip or creating it—was a thoroughly honest Judge who had
somehow managed to avoid the tentacles of the Padgitt money. Perhaps because he was
from another county, Judge Loopus believed criminals should serve long sentences,
preferably at hard labor, though he could no longer order such.
The Monday after the murder, the Padgitt lawyers had scrambled around trying to get
Danny out of jail. Judge Loopus was preoccupied with a trial in another county—his
district covered six of them—and he refused to be pushed into a quick bail hearing.
Instead, he set the matter for 9 A.M. Thursday, thus allowing the town several days to
ponder and speculate.
Because I was a member of the press, indeed the owner of the local paper, I felt it was my
duty to arrive early and get a good seat. Yes, I was a bit smug. The other spectators were
there out of curiosity. I, however, had very important work to do. Baggy and I were
sitting in the second row when the crowd began to assemble.
Danny Padgitt’s principal lawyer was a character named Lucien Wilbanks, a man I would
quickly learn to hate. He was what was left of a once prominent clan of lawyers and
bankers and such. The Wilbanks family had worked long and hard to build Clanton, then
Lucien came along and had pretty much ruined a fine family name. He fancied himself as
a radical lawyer, which, for that part of the world in 1970, was quite rare. He wore a
beard, swore like a sailor, drank heavily, and preferred clients who were rapists and
murderers and child molesters. He was the only white member of the NAACP in Ford
County, which alone was enough to get you shot there. He didn’t care.
