Lucien Wilbanks was abrasive and fearless and downright mean, and he waited until
everyone was settled in the courtroom—just before Judge Loopus entered—to walk
slowly over to me. He was holding a copy of the latest Times, which he began waving as
he started swearing. “You little son of a bitch!” he said, quite loudly, and the courtroom
became perfectly still. “Who in hell do you think you are?”
I was too mortified to attempt an answer. I felt Baggy inch away. Every single person in
the courtroom was staring at me, and I knew I had to say something. “Just telling the
truth,” I managed to say with as much conviction as I could muster.
“It’s yellow journalism!” he roared. “Sensational tabloid garbage!” The paper was just a
few inches from my nose.
“Thank you,” I said, like a real wise guy. There were at least five deputies in the
courtroom, none of whom were showing any interest in breaking this up.
“We’ll file suit tomorrow!” he said, his eyes glowing. “A million dollars in damages!”
“I got lawyers,” I said, suddenly terrified that I was about to be as bankrupt as the Caudle
family. Lucien tossed the paper into my lap, then turned and went back to his table. I was
finally able to exhale; my heart was pounding. I could feel my cheeks burning from
embarrassment and fear.
But I managed to keep a stupid grin on my face. I couldn’t show the locals that I, the
editor/publisher of their paper, was afraid of anything. But a million dollars in damages! I
immediately thought of my grandmother in Memphis. That would be a difficult
conversation.
There was a commotion up behind the bench and a bailiff opened a door. “Everyone
rise,” he announced. Judge Loopus crept through it and shuffled to his seat, his faded
black robe trailing behind him. Once situated, he surveyed the crowd, and said, “Good
morning. A rather nice turnout for a bail hearing.” Such routine matters generally
attracted no one, except for the accused, his lawyer, and perhaps his mother. There were
three hundred people watching this one.
It wasn’t just a bail hearing. It was round one of a rape/murder trial, and few people in
Clanton wanted to miss it. As I was keenly aware, most folks would not be able to attend
the proceedings. They would rely on the Times, and I was determined to give them the
details.
Every time I looked at Lucien Wilbanks, I thought about the lawsuit for a million dollars.
Surely he wasn’t going to sue my paper, was he? For what? There had been no libel, no
defamation.
Judge Loopus nodded at another bailiff and a side door opened. Danny Padgitt was
escorted in, his hands cuffed at his waist. He was wearing a neatly pressed white shirt,
khaki pants, and loafers. His face was clean shaven and free of any apparent injuries. He
was twenty-four, a year older than me, but he looked much younger. He was clean cut,
handsome, and I couldn’t help but think he ought to be in college somewhere. He
managed a slow strut, then the sneer as the bailiff removed the handcuffs. He looked
around at the crowd, and for a moment seemed to enjoy the attention. He showed all the
confidence of someone whose family had unlimited cash, which it would use to get him
out of his little jam.
Seated directly in back of him, behind the bar in the first row, were his parents and
various other Padgitts. His father Gill, grandson of the infamous Clovis Padgitt, had a
college degree and was rumored to be the chief money launderer in the gang. His mother
was well dressed and somewhat attractive, which I found unusual for someone dimwitted
enough to marry into the Padgitt clan and spend the rest of her life secluded on the island.
“I’ve never seen her before,” Baggy whispered to me.
“How often have you seen Gill?” I asked.
“Maybe twice, in the last twenty years.”
The State was represented by the county prosecutor, a part-timer named Rocky Childers.
Judge Loopus addressed him: “Mr. Childers, I assume the State is opposed to bail.”
Childers stood and said, “Yes sir.”
“On what grounds?”
“The horrific nature of the crimes, Your Honor. A vicious rape, in the victim’s own bed,
in front of her small children. A simultaneous murder caused by at least two knife
wounds. The attempted flight of the accused, Mr. Padgitt.” Childers’s words cut through
the hushed courtroom. “The great likelihood that if Mr. Padgitt leaves jail we will never
see him again.”
Lucien Wilbanks couldn’t wait to stand up and start bickering. He was on his feet
immediately. “We object to that, Your Honor. My client has no criminal record
whatsoever, never been arrested before.”
Judge Loopus looked calmly over his reading glasses and said, “Mr. Wilbanks, I do hope
that is the first and last time you interrupt anyone in this proceeding. I suggest you sit
down, and when the Court is ready to hear from you, then you will be so advised.” His
words were icy, almost bitter, and I wondered how many times these two had tangled in
this very courtroom.
Nothing bothered Lucien Wilbanks; his skin was as thick as rawhide.
Childers then gave us a bit of history. Eleven years earlier, in 1959, a certain Gerald
Padgitt had been indicted for stealing cars over in Tupelo. It took a year to find a couple
of deputies willing to enter Padgitt Island to serve a warrant, and though they survived,
they were unsuccessful. Gerald Padgitt either fled the country or secluded himself
somewhere on the island. “Wherever he is,” Childers said, “he’s never been arrested,
never been found.”
“You ever hear of Gerald Padgitt?” I whispered to Baggy.
“Nope.”
“If this defendant is released on bail, Your Honor, we’ll never see him again. It’s that
simple.” Childers sat down.
“Mr. Wilbanks,” His Honor said.
Lucien stood slowly and waved a hand at Childers. “As usual, the prosecutor is
confused,” he began pleasantly. “Gerald Padgitt is not charged with these crimes. I don’t
represent him and really don’t give a damn what happened to him.”
“Watch your language,” Loopus said.
“He’s not on trial here. This is about Danny Padgitt, a young man with no criminal record
whatsoever.”
“Does your client own real estate in this county?” Loopus asked.
“No, he does not. He’s only twenty-four.”
“Let’s get to the bottom line, Mr. Wilbanks. I know his family owns considerable acreage.
The only way I’ll grant bail is if it’s all pledged to secure his appearance for trial.”
“That’s outrageous,” Lucien growled.
“So are his alleged crimes.”
Lucien flung his legal pad onto the table. “Give me a minute to consult with the family.”
This caused quite a stir among the Padgitts. They huddled behind the defense table with
Wilbanks and there was disagreement from the very start. It was almost funny watching
these very wealthy crooks shake their heads and get mad at each other. Family fights are
quick and bitter, especially when money is at stake, and every Padgitt present seemed to
have a different opinion about which course to take. One could only imagine what it was
like when they were dividing their loot.
Lucien sensed that an agreement was unlikely, and to avoid embarrassment he turned and
addressed the Court. “That’s impossible, Your Honor,” he announced. “The Padgitt land
is owned by at least forty people, most of them absent from this courtroom. What the
Court is requiring is arbitrary and overly burdensome.”
“I’ll give you a few days to put it together,” Loopus said, obviously enjoying the
discomfort he was causing.
“No sir. It’s just not fair. My client is entitled to a reasonable bail, same as any other
defendant.”
“Then bail is denied until the preliminary hearing.”
“We waive the preliminary.”
“As you wish,” Loopus said, taking notes.
“And we request that the case be presented to the grand jury as soon as possible.”
“In due course, Mr. Wilbanks, same as all other cases.”
“Because we will move for a change of venue as soon as possible.” Lucien said this
boldly, as if an important proclamation was needed.
