“It’s a bit early for that, don’t you think?” Loopus said.
“It will be impossible for my client to get a fair trial in this county.” Wilbanks was gazing
around the courtroom as he continued, almost ignoring the Judge, who, for the moment,
seemed curious.
“An effort is already under way to indict, try, and convict my client before he has the
chance to defend himself, and I think the Court should intervene immediately with a gag
order.”
Lucien Wilbanks was the only one who needed gagging.
“Where are you going with this, Mr. Wilbanks?” Loopus asked.
“Have you seen the local paper, Your Honor?”
“Not lately.”
All eyes seemed to settle upon me, and once again my heart stopped dead still.
Wilbanks glared at me as he continued. “Front page stories, bloody photographs,
unnamed sources, enough half-truths and innuendos to convict any innocent man!”
Baggy was inching away again, and I was very much alone.
Lucien stomped across the courtroom and tossed a copy up to the bench. “Take a look at
this,” he growled. Loopus adjusted his reading glasses, pulled the Times up high, and
sank back into his fine leather chair. He began reading, apparently in no particular hurry.
He was a slow reader. At some point my heart began functioning again, returning with
the fury of a jackhammer. And I noticed my collar was wet where it rested on the back of
my neck. Loopus finished the front page and slowly opened it up. The courtroom was
silent. Would he toss me into jail right there? Nod to a bailiff to slap handcuffs on me and
drag me away? I wasn’t a lawyer. I’d just been threatened with a million-dollar lawsuit,
by a man who’d certainly filed many, and now the Judge was reading my rather lurid
accounts while the entire town waited for his verdict.
A lot of hard glances were coming my way, so I found it easier to scribble on my
reporter’s pad, though I couldn’t read anything I was writing. I worked hard at keeping a
straight face. What I really wanted to do was bolt from the courtroom and race back to
Memphis.
Pages rattled, and His Honor was finally finished. He leaned slightly forward to the
microphone and uttered words that would instantly make my career. He said, “It’s very
well written. Engaging, perhaps a bit macabre, but certainly nothing out of line.”
I kept scribbling, as if I hadn’t heard this. In a sudden, unforeseen, and rather harrowing
skirmish, I had just prevailed over the Padgitts and Lucien Wilbanks. “Congratulations,”
Baggy whispered.
Loopus refolded the newspaper and laid it down. He allowed Wilbanks to rant and rave
for a few minutes about leaks from the cops, leaks from the prosecutor’s office, potential
leaks from the grand jury room, all of them somehow coordinated by a conspiracy of
unnamed people determined to treat his client unfairly. What he was really doing was
performing for the Padgitts. He had lost his attempt to get bail, so he had to impress them
with his zealousness.
Loopus bought none of it.
As we would soon learn, Lucien’s act had been nothing but a smokescreen. He had no
intention of moving the case from Ford County.
Chapter 6
When I bought the Times, its prehistoric building came with the deal. It had very little
value. It was on the south side of the Clanton square, one of four decaying structures built
wall to wall by someone in a hurry; long and narrow, three levels, with a basement that
all employees feared and shied away from. There were several offices in the front, all
with stained and threadbare carpet, peeling walls, the smell of last century’s pipe smoke
forever fused to the ceilings.
In the rear, as far away as possible, was the printing press. Every Tuesday night, Hardy,
our pressman, somehow coaxed the old letterpress to life and managed to produce yet
another edition of our paper. His space was rank with the sharp odor of printer’s ink.
The room on the first floor was lined with bookshelves sagging under the weight of dusty
tomes that had not been opened in decades; collections of history and Shakespeare and
Irish poetry and rows of badly outdated British encyclopedias. Spot thought such books
would impress anyone who ventured in.
Standing in the front window, and looking through dingy panes of glass, across which
someone had long ago painted the word “TIMES,” one could see the Ford County
Courthouse and the bronze Confederate sentry guarding it. A plaque below his feet listed
the names of the sixty-one county boys who died in the Great War, most at Shiloh.
The sentry could also be seen from my office, which was on the second floor. It, too, was
lined with bookshelves holding Spot’s personal library, an eclectic collection that
appeared to have been as neglected as the one downstairs. It would be years before I
moved any of his books.
The office was spacious, cluttered, filled with useless artifacts and worthless files and
adorned with fake portraits of Confederate generals. I loved the place. When Spot left he
took nothing, and after a few months no one seemed to want any of his junk. So it
remained where it was, neglected as always, virtually untouched by me, and slowly
becoming my property. I boxed up his personal things—letters, bank statements, notes,
postcards—and stored them in one of the many unused rooms down the hall where they
continued to gather dust and slowly rot.

My office had two sets of French doors that opened to a small porch with a wrought-iron
railing, and there was enough room out there for four people to sit in wicker chairs and
watch the square. Not that there was much to see, but it was a pleasant way to pass the
time, especially with a drink.
Baggy was always ready for a drink. He brought a bottle of bourbon after dinner, and we
assumed our positions in the rockers. The town was still buzzing over the bail hearing. It
had been widely assumed that Danny Padgitt would be sprung as soon as Lucien
Wilbanks and Mackey Don Coley could get matters arranged. Promises would be made,
money would change hands, Sheriff Coley would somehow personally guarantee the
boy’s appearance at trial. But Judge Loopus had other plans.
Baggy’s wife was a nurse. She worked the night shift in the emergency room at the
hospital. He worked days, if his rather languid observations of the town could be
considered labor. They rarely saw each other, which was evidently a good thing because
they fought constantly. Their adult children had fled, leaving the two of them to wage
their own little war. After a couple of drinks, Baggy always began the cutting remarks
about his wife. He was fifty-two, looked at least seventy, and I suspected that the booze
was the principal reason he was aging badly and lighting at home.
“We kicked their butts,” he said proudly. “Never before has a newspaper story been so
clearly exonerated. Right there in open court.”
“What’s a gag order?” I asked. I was an ill-informed rookie, and everybody knew it. No
sense in pretending I knew something when I didn’t.
“I’ve never seen one. I’ve heard of them, and I think they’re used by judges to shut up the
lawyers and the litigants.”
“So they don’t apply to newspapers?”
“Never. Wilbanks was grandstanding, that’s all. The guy is a member of the ACLU, only
one in Ford County. He understands the First Amendment. There’s no way a court can
tell a newspaper not to print something. He was having a bad day, it was apparent his
client was staying in jail, so he had to showboat. Typical maneuver by lawyers. They
teach it in law school.”
“So you don’t think we’ll get sued?”
“Hell no. Look, first of all, there’s no lawsuit. We didn’t libel or defame anyone. Sure we
got kinda loose with some of the facts, but it was all small stuff, and it was probably true
anyway. Second, if Wilbanks had a lawsuit he would have to file it here, in Ford County.
Same courthouse, same courtroom, same Judge. The Honorable Reed Loopus, who, this
morning, read our stories and declared them to be just fine. The lawsuit was shot down
before Wilbanks typed the first word. Brilliant.”
I certainly didn’t feel brilliant. I’d been worrying about the million dollars in damages
and wondering where I might find such a sum. The bourbon was finally settling in and I
relaxed. It was Thursday night in Clanton and few people were out. Every shop and store
and office around the square was locked tight.
Baggy, as usual, had been relaxed for a long time. Margaret had whispered to me that he
often had bourbon for breakfast. He and a one-legged lawyer called Major liked to have a
nip with their coffee. They would meet on the balcony outside Major’s office across the
square and smoke and drink and argue law and politics while the courthouse came to life.
Major lost a leg at Guadalcanal, according to his version of the Second War. His law
practice was specialized to the point that he did nothing but type wills for the elderly. He
typed them himself—had no need for a secretary. He worked about as hard as Baggy, and
the two were often seen in the courtroom, half-soused, watching yet another trial.
“I guess Mackey Don’s got the boy in the suite,” Baggy said, his words starting to slur.
“The suite?” I asked.
“Yeah—have you seen the jail?”
“No.”
“It’s not fit for animals. No heat, no air, plumbing works about half the time. Filthy
conditions. Rotten food. And that’s for the whites. The blacks are at the other end, all in
one long cell. Their only toilet is a hole in the floor.”
“I think I’ll pass.”
“It’s an embarrassment to the county, but, sadly, it’s the same in most places around here.
Anyway, there’s one little cell with air conditioning and carpet on the floor, one clean
bed, color television, good food. It’s called the suite and Mackey Don puts his favorites
there.”
I was mentally taking notes. To Baggy, it was business as usual. To me, a recent college
attendee and sometime journalism student, a real muckraking story was in the works.
“You think Padgitt’s in the suite?”
“Probably. He came to court in his own clothes.”
“As opposed to?”
“Those orange jail coveralls everybody else wears. You haven’t seen them?”
Yes, I had seen them. I had been in court one time, a month or so earlier, and I suddenly
recalled seeing two or three defendants sitting in the courtroom, waiting for a judge, all
wearing different shades of faded orange coveralls. “Ford County Jail” was printed across
the front and back of the shirts.
Baggy took a sip and expounded. “You see, for the preliminary hearings and such, the
defendants, if they’re still in jail, always come to court dressed like prisoners. In the old
days, Mackey Don would make them wear the coveralls even during their trials. Lucien
Wilbanks got a guilty verdict reversed on the grounds that the jury was predisposed to
convict since his client certainly looked guilty as hell in his orange jail suit. And he was
right. Kinda hard to convince a jury you’re not guilty when you’re dressed like an inmate
and wearing rubber shower shoes.”
I marveled once again at the backwardness of Mississippi. I could see a criminal
defendant, especially a black one, facing a jury and expecting a fair trial, wearing jail
garb designed to be spotted from half a mile away. “Still fightin’ the War,” was a slogan
I’d heard several times in Ford County. There was a frustrating resistance to change,
especially where crime and punishment were concerned.
* * *
Around noon the following day I walked to the jail looking for Sheriff Coley. Under the
pretext of asking him questions about the Kassellaw investigation, I planned to see as
many of the inmates as possible. His secretary informed me, rather rudely, that he was in
a meeting, and that was fine with me.
Two prisoners were cleaning the front offices. Outside, two more were pulling weeds
from a flower bed. I walked around the block and behind the jail I saw a small open area
with a basketball goal. Six prisoners were loitering under the shade of a small oak tree.
On the east side of the jail I saw three prisoners standing in a window, behind bars,
gazing down at me.
Thirteen inmates in all. Thirteen orange suits.
Wiley’s nephew was consulted about things around the jail. At first he was reluctant to
talk, but he had a deep hatred of Sheriff Coley, and he thought he could trust me. He
confirmed what Baggy had suspected—Danny Padgitt was living the good life in an airconditioned
cell and eating whatever he wanted. He dressed as he wished, played
checkers with the Sheriff himself, and made phone calls all day long.

*** 

The next edition of the Times did much to solidify my reputation as a hard-charging, 
fearless, twenty-three-year-old fool. On the front page was a huge photo of Danny Padgitt 
being led into the courthouse for his bail hearing. He was handcuffed and wore street 
clothes. He was also giving the camera one of his patented go-to-hell looks. Just above it 
was the massive headline: BAIL DENIED FOR DANNY PADGITT. The story was 
lengthy and detailed. 

Alongside was another story, almost as long and much more scandalous. Quoting 
unnamed sources, I described at length the conditions of Mr. Padgitt’s incarceration. I 
mentioned every possible perk he was getting, including personal time with Sheriff Coley 
over the checkerboard. I talked about his food and diet, color television, unlimited phone 
use. Everything I could possibly verify. Then I compared this with how the other twentyone inmates were living. 

On page two, I ran an old black-and-white file photo of four defendants being led into the 
courthouse. Each, of course, was wearing the coveralls. Each had handcuffs and unruly 
hair. I blacked out their faces so, whoever they were, they would not suffer any more 
embarrassment. Their cases had long since been closed. 

I’d placed another picture of Danny Padgitt as he was led into the courthouse next to the 
file photo. Except for the handcuffs, he could’ve been on his way to a party. The contrast 
was startling. The boy was being pampered by Sheriff Coley, who, so far, had refused to 
discuss the matter with me. Big mistake. 

In the story, I detailed my efforts to chat with the Sheriff. My phone calls had not been 
returned. I’d gone to the jail twice and he wouldn’t meet with me. I’d left a list of 
questions for him, which he chose to ignore. I painted the picture of an aggressive young 
reporter desperately searching for the truth and being stiff-armed by an elected official. 

Since Lucien Wilbanks was one of the least popular men in Clanton, I included him in 
the fray. Using the phone, which I was quickly learning was a great equalizer, I called his 
office four times before he called me back. At first he had no comment about his client or 
the charges, but when I persisted with questions about his treatment at the jail he erupted. 
“I don’t run the damned jail, son!” he growled, and I could almost see his red eyes 
glowing at me. I quoted him on that. 


“Have you interviewed your client at the jail?” I asked. 

“Of course.” 

“What was he wearing?” 

“Don’t you have better things to report?” 

“No sir. What was he wearing?” 

“Well he wasn’t naked.” 

That was too good a quote to pass up, so I put it in bold print in a sidebar. 

With a rapist/murderer, a corrupt Sheriff, and a radical lawyer on one side, and me 
standing alone on the other, I knew I couldn’t lose the fight. The response to the story 
was astounding. Baggy and Wiley reported that the cafes were buzzing with admiration 
for the fearless young editor of the paper. The Padgitts and Lucien had been despised for 
a long time. Now it was time to get rid of Coley. 

Margaret said we were swamped with phone calls from readers incensed with the soft 
treatment Danny was receiving. Wiley’s nephew reported that the jail was in chaos and 
Mackey Don was at war with his deputies. He was coddling a murderer—1971 was an 
election year. Folks were angry out there and they might all lose their jobs. 

*** 

Those two weeks at the Times were crucial to its survival. The readers were hungry for 
details, and, through timing, dumb luck, and some guts, I gave them just what they 
wanted. The paper was suddenly alive; it was a force. It was trusted. The people wanted it 
to report with detail and without fear. 

Baggy and Margaret told me that Spot would have never used the bloody pictures and 
challenged the Sheriff. But they were still quite timid. I can’t say that my brashness had 
in any way emboldened my stall”. The Times was, and would be, a one-man show with a 
rather weak supporting staff. 

Little did I care. I was telling the truth and damning the consequences. I was a local hero. 
Subscriptions jumped to almost three thousand. Ad revenue doubled. Not only was I 
shining a new light into the county, I was making money at the same time. 


Chapter 7 

The bomb was a rather basic incendiary device that, if detonated, would have quickly 
engulfed our printing room. There the fire would have been energized by various 
chemicals and no less than 110 gallons of printer’s ink, and would have raced quickly 
through the front offices. After a few minutes, with no sprinkler system and no alarms, 
who knows how much of the upper two floors could have been saved. Probably not much. 
It was very likely that the fire, if properly detonated in the early hours of Thursday 
morning, would’ve burned most of the four buildings in our row. 

It was discovered sitting ominously, still intact, next to a pile of old papers in the printing 
room, by the village idiot. Or, I should say, one of the village idiots. Clanton had more 
than its share. 

His name was Piston, and he, like the building and the ancient press and the untouched 
libraries upstairs and down, came with the deal. Piston was not an official employee of 
the Times, but he nonetheless showed up every Friday to collect his $50 in cash. No 
checks. For this fee he sometimes swept the floors and occasionally rearranged the dirt on 
the front windows, and he hauled out the trash when someone complained. He kept no 
hours, came and went as he pleased, didn’t believe in knocking on doors when meetings 
were in progress, liked to use our phones and drink our coffee, and though he at first 
looked rather sinister eyes wide apart and covered with thick glasses, oversized trucker’s 
cap pulled down low, scraggly beard, hideous buck teeth—he was harmless. He provided 
his janitorial services for several businesses around the square, and somehow survived. 
No one knew where he lived, or with whom, or how he got about town. The less we knew 
about Piston, the better. 
