Piston was in early Thursday morning—he’d had a key for decades—and said that he 
first heard something ticking. Upon closer examination he noticed three, five-gallon 
plastic cans laced together with a wooden box sitting on the floor next to them. The 
ticking sound came from the box. Piston had been around the printing room for many 
years and occasionally helped Hardy on Tuesday nights when he ran the paper. 

For most folks, panic would quickly follow curiosity, but for Piston it took a while. After 
poking around the cans to make sure that they were in fact filled with gasoline, and after 
determining that a series of dangerous-looking wires tied everything together, he walked 
to Margaret’s office and called Hardy. He said the ticking was getting louder. 

Hardy called the police, and around 9 A.M. I was awakened with the news. 

Most of downtown was evacuated by the time I arrived. Piston was sitting on the hood of 
a car, by then thoroughly distraught at having survived such a close call. He was being 


attended by some acquaintances and an ambulance driver, and he seemed to be enjoying 
the attention. 

Wiley Meek had photographed the bomb before the police removed the gasoline cans and 
placed them safely in the alley behind our building. “Woulda blown up half of 
downtown,” was Wiley’s uneducated evaluation of the bomb. He nervously darted 
around the scene, recording the excitement for future use. 

The chief of police explained to me that the area was off limits because the wooden box 
had not been opened and whatever was in there was still ticking. “It might explode,” he 
said gravely, as if he was the first one smart enough to realize the danger. I doubted if he 
had much experience with bombs, but I went along. An official from the state crime lab 
was being rushed in. It was decided that the four buildings in our row would remain 
unoccupied until this expert finished his business. 

A bomb in downtown Clanton! The news spread faster than the fire would have, and all 
work stopped. The county offices emptied, as well as the banks and stores and cafes, and 
before long large groups of spectators were crowded across the street, under the huge 
oaks on the south side of the courthouse, a safe distance away. They gawked at our little 
building, obviously concerned and frightened but also waiting for some excitement. 
They’d never seen a bomb blast before. 

The Clanton city police had been joined by the Sheriff’s deputies, and every uniform in 
the county was soon present, milling about on the sidewalks, doing absolutely nothing. 
Sheriff Coley and the police chief huddled and conferred and watched the throng across 
the street, then barked some orders here and there, but if any of their orders were 
followed it wasn’t noticeable. It was obvious to all that the city and county had no bomb 
drills. 

Baggy needed a drink. It was too early for me. I followed him into the rear of the 
courthouse, up a narrow flight of stairs I’d not seen before, through a cramped hallway, 
then up another twenty steps to a small dirty room with a low ceiling. “Used to be the old 
jury room,” he said. “Then it was the law library.” 

“What is it now?” I asked, almost afraid of the answer. 

“The Bar Room. Get it? Bar? Lawyers? Booze?” 

“Got it.” There was a card table with folding legs and a beaten look that indicated years 
of use. Around it were half a dozen mismatched chairs, all county hand-me-downs that 
had been passed from one county office to another and finally ditched in this dingy little 
room. 

In one corner there was a small refrigerator with a padlock. Baggy, of course, had a key, 
and inside he found a bottle of bourbon. He poured a generous shot into a paper cup and 


said, “Grab a chair.” We pulled two of them up to the window, and below was the scene 
we had just left. “Not a bad view, huh?” he said proudly. 

“How often you come here?”
“Twice a week, maybe, sometimes more. We play poker every Tuesday and Thursday at
noon.”


“Who’s in the club?”
“It’s a secret society.” He took a sip and smacked his lips as if he’d been in the desert for


a month. A spider made its way down a thick web along the window. Dust was half an
inch thick on the sills.
“I guess they’re losin’ their touch,” he said, gazing down at the excitement.
“They?” I was almost afraid to ask.
“The Padgitts.” He said this with a certain smugness, then allowed it to hang in the air for


my benefit.
“You’re sure it’s the Padgitts?” I asked.
Baggy thought he knew everything, and he was right about half the time. He smirked and


grunted, took another sip, then said, “They’ve been burnin’ buildings forever. It’s one of 
their scams—insurance fraud. They’ve made a bloody fortune off insurance companies.” 
A quick sip. “Odd, though, that they would use gasoline. Your more talented arsonists 
stay away from gasoline because it’s easily detected. You know that?” 

“No.”
“True. A good fire marshal can smell gasoline within minutes after the blaze is out.


Gasoline means arson. Arson means no insurance payoffs.” A sip. “Of course, in this case,
they probably wanted you to know it’s arson. Makes sense, doesn’t it?”
Nothing made sense at that moment. I was too confused to say much.
Baggy was content to do the talking. “Come to think of it, that’s probably the reason it


wasn’t detonated. They wanted you to see it. If it went off, then the county wouldn’t have
the Times, which might upset some folks. Might make some other folks happy.”
“Thanks.”
“Anyway, that explains it better. It was a subtle act of intimidation.”
“Subtle?”



“Yes, compared to what could’ve been. Believe me, those guys know how to burn 
buildings. You were lucky.” 

I noticed how he had quickly disassociated himself from the paper. It was “I” who was 
lucky, not “we.” 

The bourbon had found its way to the brain and was loosening the tongue. “About three 
years ago, maybe four, there was a large fire at one of their lumber mills, the one on 
Highway 401, just off the island. They never burn anything on the island because they 
don’t want the authorities snoopin’ around. Anyway, the insurance company smelled a rat, 
refused to pay, so Lucien Wilbanks filed this big lawsuit. It came to trial, in front of the 
Honorable Reed Loopus. I heard ever’ word of it.” A long, satisfying drink. 

“Who won?” 

He ignored me completely because the story was not yet properly laid out. “It was a big 
fire. The boys from Clanton took off with all their trucks. The volunteers from Karaway 
took off, ever’ yokel with a siren went screamin’ off toward Padgitt Island. Nothin’ like a 
good fire around here to get the boys worked up. That and a bomb, I guess, but I can’t 
remember the last bomb.” 

“And so…” 

“Highway 401 runs through some lowland near Padgitt Island, real swampy. There’s a 
bridge over Massey’s Creek, and when the fire trucks came flyin’ up to the bridge they 
found a pickup layin’ on its side, like it had rolled over. The road was completely blocked; 
couldn’t go around because there was nothin’ but swamps and ditches.” He smacked his 
lips and poured more from the bottle. It was time for me to say something, but whatever I 
said would be completely ignored anyway. This was the way Baggy preferred to be 
prompted. 

“Whose pickup was it?” I asked, the words barely out of my mouth before he was 
shaking his head as if the question was completely off the mark. 

“The fire was ragin’ like hell. Fire trucks backed up all along 401 because some clown 
had flipped his pickup. Never found him. No sign of a driver. No sign of an owner 
because there was no registration. No tags. The vehicle ID had been sanded off. The truck 
was never claimed. Wasn’t damaged much cither. All this came out at trial. Ever’body 
knew the Padgitts set the fire, flipped one of their stolen trucks to block the road, but the 
insurance company couldn’t prove it.” 

Down below Sheriff Coley had found his bullhorn. He was asking the people to please 
stay off the street in front of our office. His shrieking voice added urgency to the situation. 

“So the insurance company won?” I said, anxious to get to the end. 


“Helluva trial. Went on for three days. Wilbanks can usually cut a deal with one or two 
people on the jury. Been doin’ it for years and never gets caught. Plus he knows 
ever’body in the county. The insurance boys were up from Jackson, and they didn’t have 
a clue. The jury stayed out for two hours, came back with a verdict for the claim, a 
hundred grand, and for good measure, tacked on a million in punitive damages.” 

“One point one million!” I said. 

“You got it. The first million-dollar verdict in Ford County. Lasted about a year until the 
Supreme Court took an ax to it and cut out the punitive.” 

The notion of Lucien Wilbanks having such sway over jurors was not comforting. Baggy 
neglected his bourbon for a moment and gazed at something below. “This is a bad sign, 
son,” he finally said. “Really bad.” 

I was his boss and didn’t like to be referred to as “son,” but I let it slide. I had more 
pressing matters at hand. “The intimidation?” I said. 

“Yep. The Padgitts rarely leave the island. The fact that they’ve brought their little show 
on the road means they’re ready for war. If they can intimidate the newspaper, then 
they’ll try it with the jury. They already own the Sheriff.” 

“But Wilbanks said he wants a change of venue.” 

He snorted and rediscovered his drink. “Don’t bet on it, son.” 

“Please call me Willie.” Odd how I was now clinging to that name. 

“Don’t bet on it, Willie. The boy’s guilty; his only chance is to have a jury that can be 
bought or scared. Ten to one odds the trial takes place right here, in this building.” 
