The Last Juror 
John Grisham 

“In 1970, one of Mississippi’s more colorful weekly newspapers, “The Ford County 
Times,” went bankrupt. To the surprise and dismay of many, ownership was assumed by 
a 23 year-old college dropout, named Willie Traynor. The future of the paper looked grim 
until a young mother was brutally raped and murdered by a member of the notorious 
Padgitt family. Willie Traynor reported all the gruesome details, and his newspaper began 
to prosper. “The murderer, Danny Padgitt, was tried before a packed courthouse in 
Clanton, Mississippi. The trial came to a startling and dramatic end when the defendant 
threatened revenge against the jurors if they convicted him. Nevertheless, they found him 
guilty, and he was sentenced to life in prison.” But in Mississippi in 1970, “life” didn’t 
necessarily mean “life,” and nine years later Danny Padgitt managed to get himself 
paroled. He returned to Ford County, and the retribution began. 

The Last Juror 

by John Grisham 

Part One 

Chapter 1 

After decades of patient mismanagement and loving neglect, The Ford County Times 
went bankrupt in 1970. The owner and publisher, Miss Emma Caudle, was ninety-three 
years old and strapped to a bed in a nursing home in Tupelo. The editor, her son Wilson 
Caudle, was in his seventies and had a plate in his head from the First War. A perfect 
circle of dark grafted skin covered the plate at the top of his long, sloping forehead, and 
throughout his adult life he had endured the nickname of Spot. Spot did this. Spot did that. 
Here, Spot. There, Spot. 


In his younger years, he covered town meetings, football games, elections, trials, church 
socials, all sorts of activities in Ford County. He was a good reporter, thorough and 
intuitive. Evidently, the head wound did not affect his ability to write. But sometime after 
the Second War the plate apparently shifted, and Mr. Caudle stopped writing everything 
but the obituaries. He loved obituaries. He spent hours on them. He filled paragraphs of 
eloquent prose detailing the lives of even the humblest of Ford Countians. And the death 
of a wealthy or prominent citizen was front page news, with Mr. Caudle seizing the 
moment. He never missed a wake or a funeral, never wrote anything bad about anyone. 
All received glory in the end. Ford County was a wonderful place to die. And Spot was a 
very popular man, even though he was crazy. 

The only real crisis of his journalistic career happened in 1967, about the time the civil 
rights movement finally made it to Ford County. The paper had never shown the slightest 
hint of racial tolerance. No black faces appeared in its pages, except those belonging to 
known or suspected criminals. No black wedding announcements. No black honor 
students or baseball teams. But in 1967, Mr. Caudle made a startling discovery. He 
awoke one morning to the realization that black people were dying in Ford County, and 
their deaths were not being properly reported. There was a whole, new, fertile world of 
obituaries waiting out there, and Mr. Caudle set sail in dangerous and uncharted waters. 
On Wednesday, March 8, 1967, the Times became the first white-owned weekly in 
Mississippi to run the obituary of a Negro. For the most part, it went unnoticed. 

The following week, he ran three black obituaries, and people were beginning to talk. By 
the fourth week, a regular boycott was under way, with subscriptions being canceled and 
advertisers holding their money. Mr. Caudle knew what was happening, but he was too 
impressed with his new status as an integrationist to worry about such trivial matters as 
sales and profits. Six weeks after the historic obituary, he announced, on the front page 
and in bold print, his new policy. He explained to the public that he would publish 
whatever he damned well pleased, and if the white folks didn’t like it, then he would 
simply cut back on their obituaries. 

Now, dying properly is an important part of living in Mississippi, for whites and blacks, 
and the thought of being laid to rest without the benefit of one of Spot’s glorious sendoffs was more than most whites could stand. And they knew he was crazy enough to 
carry out his threat. 

The next edition was filled with all sorts of obituaries, blacks and whites, all neatly 
alphabetized and desegregated. It sold out, and a brief period of prosperity followed. 

The bankruptcy was called involuntary, as if others had eager volunteers. The pack was 
led by a print supplier from Memphis that was owed $60,000. Several creditors had not 
been paid in six months. The old Security Bank was calling in a loan. 

I was new, but I’d heard the rumors. I was sitting on a desk in the front room of the 
Times’s offices reading a magazine, when a midget in a pair of pointed toes strutted in 
the front door and asked for Wilson Caudle. 


“He’s at the funeral home,” I said. 

He was a cocky midget. I could see a gun on his hip under a wrinkled navy blazer, a gun 
worn in such a manner so that folks would see it. He probably had a permit, but in Ford 
County one was not really needed, not in 1970. In fact, permits were frowned upon. “I 
need to serve these papers on him,” he said, waving an envelope. 

I was not about to be helpful, but it’s difficult being rude to a midget. Even one with a 
gun. “He’s at the funeral home,” I repeated. 

“Then I’ll just leave them with you,” he declared. 

Although I’d been around for less than two months, and though I’d gone to college up 
North, I had learned a few things. I knew that good papers were not served on people. 
They were mailed or shipped or hand-delivered, but never served. The papers were 
trouble, and I wanted no part of them. 

“I’m not taking the papers,” I said, looking down. 

The laws of nature require midgets to be docile, noncombative people, and this little fella 
was no exception. The gun was a ruse. He glanced around the front office with a smirk, 
but he knew the situation was hopeless. With a flair for the dramatic, he stuffed the 
envelope back into his pocket and demanded, “Where’s the funeral home?” 

I pointed this way and that, and he left. An hour later, Spot stumbled through the door, 
waving the papers and bawling hysterically. “It’s over! It’s over!” he kept wailing as I 
held the Petition for Involuntary Bankruptcy. Margaret Wright, the secretary, and Hardy, 
the pressman, came from the back and tried to console him. He sat in a chair, face in 
hands, elbows on knees, sobbing pitifully. I read the petition aloud for the benefit of the 
others. 

It said Mr. Caudle had to appear in court in a week over in Oxford to meet with the 
creditors and the Judge, and that a decision would be made as to whether the paper would 
continue to operate while a trustee sorted things out. I could tell Margaret and Hardy 
were more concerned about their jobs than about Mr. Caudle and his breakdown, but they 
gamely stood next to him and patted his shoulders. 

When the crying stopped, he suddenly stood, bit his lip, and announced, “I’ve got to tell 
Mother.” 

The three of us looked at each other. Miss Emma Caudle had departed this life years 
earlier, but her feeble heart continued to work just barely enough to postpone a funeral. 
She neither knew nor cared what color Jell-O they were feeding her, and she certainly 
cared nothing about Ford County and its newspaper. She was blind and deaf and weighed 


less than eighty pounds, and now Spot was about to discuss involuntary bankruptcy with 
her. At that point, I realized that he, too, was no longer with us. 

He started crying again and left. Six months later I would write his obituary. 

Because I had attended college, and because I was holding the papers, Hardy and 
Margaret looked hopefully at me for advice. I was a journalist, not a lawyer, but I said 
that I would take the papers to the Caudle family lawyer. We would follow his advice. 
They smiled weakly and returned to work. 

At noon, I bought a six-pack at Quincy’s One Stop in Lowtown, the black section of 
Clanton, and went for a long drive in my Spitfire. It was late in February, unseasonably 
warm, so I put the top down and headed for the lake, wondering, not for the first time, 
just exactly what I was doing in Ford County, Mississippi. 

*** 

I grew up in Memphis and studied journalism at Syracuse for five years before my 
grandmother got tired of paying for what was becoming an extended education. My 
grades were unremarkable, and I was a year away from a degree. Maybe a year and a half. 
She, BeeBee, had plenty of money, hated to spend it, and after five years she figured my 
opportunity had been sufficiently funded. When she cut me off I was very disappointed, 
but I did not complain, to her anyway. I was her only grandchild and her estate would be 
a delight. 

I studied journalism with a hangover. In the early days at Syracuse, I aspired to be an 
investigative reporter with the New York Times or the Washington Post. I wanted to save 
the world by uncovering corruption and environmental abuse and government waste and 
the injustice suffered by the weak and oppressed. Pulitzers were waiting for me. After a 
year or so of such lofty dreams, I saw a movie about a foreign correspondent who dashed 
around the world looking for wars, seducing beautiful women, and somehow finding the 
time to write award-winning stories. He spoke eight languages, wore a beard, combat 
boots, starched khakis that never wrinkled. So I decided I would become such a journalist. 
I grew a beard, bought some boots and khakis, tried to learn German, tried to score with 
prettier girls. During my junior year, when my grades began their steady decline to the 
bottom of the class, I became captivated by the idea of working for a small-town 
newspaper. I cannot explain this attraction, except that it was at about this time that I met 
and befriended Nick Diener. He was from rural Indiana, and for decades his family had 
owned a rather prosperous county newspaper. He drove a fancy little Alfa Romeo and 
always had plenty of cash. We became close friends. 


Nick was a bright student who could have handled medicine, law, or engineering. His 
only goal, however, was to return to Indiana and run the family business. This baffled me 
until we got drunk one night and he told me how much his father cleared each year off 
their small weekly—circulation six thousand. It was a gold mine, he said. Just local news, 
wedding announcements, church socials, honor rolls, sports coverage, pictures of 
basketball teams, a few recipes, a few obituaries, and pages of advertising. Maybe a little 
politics, but stay away from controversy. And count your money. His father was a 
millionaire. It was laid-back, low-pressure journalism with money growing on trees, 
according to Nick. 

This appealed to me. After my fourth year, which should’ve been my last but wasn’t 
close, I spent the summer interning at a small weekly in the Ozark Mountains of 
Arkansas. The pay was peanuts but BeeBee was impressed because I was employed. 
Each week I mailed her the paper, at least half of which was written by me. The 
owner/editor/publisher was a wonderful old gentleman who was delighted to have a 
reporter who wanted to write. He was quite wealthy. 

After five years at Syracuse my grades were irreparable, and the well ran dry. I returned 
to Memphis, visited BeeBee, thanked her for her efforts, and told her I loved her. She told 
me to find a job. 

At the time Wilson Caudle’s sister lived in Memphis, and through the course of things 
this lady met BeeBee at one of those hot tea drinkers’ parties. After a few phone calls 
back and forth, I was packed and headed to Clanton, Mississippi, where Spot was eagerly 
waiting. After an hour of orientation, he turned me loose on Ford County. 

In the next edition he ran a sweet little story with a photo of me announcing my 
“internship” at the Times. It made the front page. News was slow in those days. 

The announcement contained two horrendous errors that would haunt me for years. The 
first and less serious was the fact that Syracuse had now joined the Ivy League, at least 
according to Spot. He informed his dwindling readership that I had received my Ivy 
League education at Syracuse. It was a month before anyone mentioned this to me. I was 
beginning to believe that no one read the paper, or, worse, those who did were complete 
idiots. 

The second misstatement changed my life. I was born Joyner William Traynor. Until I 
was twelve I hammered my parents with inquiries about why two supposedly intelligent 
people would stick Joyner on a newborn. The story finally leaked that one of my parents, 
both of whom denied responsibility, had insisted on Joyner as an olive branch to some 
feuding relative who allegedly had money. I never met the man, my namesake. He died 
broke as far as I was concerned, but I nonetheless had Joyner for a lifetime. When I 
enrolled at Syracuse I was J. William, a rather imposing name for an eighteen-year-old. 
But Vietnam and the riots and all the rebellion and social upheaval convinced me that J. 
William sounded too corporate, too establishment. I became Will. 


Spot at various times called me Will, William, Bill, or even Billy, and since I would 
answer to all of them I never knew what was next. In the announcement, under my 
smiling face, was my new name. Willie Traynor. I was horrified. I had never dreamed of 
anyone calling me Willie. I went to a prep school in Memphis and then to college in New 
York, and I had never met a person named Willie. I wasn’t a good ole boy. I drove a 
Triumph Spitfire and had long hair. 

What would I tell my fraternity brothers at Syracuse? What would I tell BeeBee? 

After hiding in my apartment for two days, I mustered the courage to confront Spot and 
demand he do something. I wasn’t sure what, but he’d made the mistake and he could 
damned well fix it. I marched into the Times office and bumped into Davey Bigmouth 
Bass, the sports editor of the paper. “Hey, cool name,” he said. I followed him into his 
office, seeking advice. 

“My name’s not Willie,” I said. 

“It is now.” 

“My name’s Will.” 

“They’ll love you around here. A smart-ass from up North with long hair and a little 
imported sports car. Hell, folks’ll think you’re pretty cool with a name like Willie. Think 
of Joe Willie.” 

“Who’s Joe Willie?” 

“Joe Willie Namath.” 

“Oh him.” 

“Yeah, he’s a Yankee like you, from Pennsylvania or some place, but when he got to 
Alabama he went from Joseph William to Joe Willie. The girls chased him all over the 
place.” 

I began to feel better. In 1970, Joe Namath was probably the most famous athlete in the 
country. I went for a drive and kept repeating “Willie.” Within a couple of weeks the 
name was beginning to stick. Everybody called me Willie and seemed to feel more 
comfortable because I had such a down-to-earth name. 

I told BeeBee it was just a temporary pseudonym. 

*** 


The Times was a very thin paper, and I knew immediately that it was in trouble. Heavy 
on the obits, light on news and advertising. The employees were disgruntled, but quiet 
and loyal. Jobs were scarce in Ford County in 1970. After a week it was obvious even to 
my novice eyes that the paper was operating at a loss. Obits are free—ads are not. Spot 
spent most of his time in his cluttered office, napping periodically and calling the funeral 
home. Sometimes they called him. Sometimes the families would stop just hours after 
Uncle Wilber’s last breath and hand over a long, flowery, handwritten narrative that Spot 
would seize and carry delicately to his desk. Behind a locked door, he would write, edit, 
research, and rewrite until it was perfect. 

He told me the entire county was mine to cover. The paper had one other general reporter, 
Baggy Suggs, a pickled old goat who spent his hours hanging around the courthouse 
across the street sniffing for gossip and drinking bourbon with a small club of washed-up 
lawyers too old and too drunk to practice anymore. As I would soon learn, Baggy was too 
lazy to check sources and dig for anything interesting, and it was not unusual for his front 
page story to be some dull account of a boundary dispute or a wife beating. 

Margaret, the secretary, was a fine Christian lady who ran the place, though she was 
smart enough to allow Spot to think he was the boss. She was in her early fifties and had 
worked there for twenty years. She was the rock, the anchor, and everything at the Times 
revolved around her. Margaret was soft-spoken, almost shy, and from day one was 
completely intimidated by me because I was from Memphis and had gone to school up 
North for five years. I was careful not to wear my Ivy Leagueness on my shoulder, but at 
the same time I wanted these rural Mississippians to know that I had been superbly 
educated. 

She and I became gossiping pals, and after a week she confirmed what I already 
suspected—that Mr. Caudle was indeed crazy, and that the newspaper was indeed in dire 
financial straits. But, she said, the Caudles have family money! 

It would be years before I understood this mystery. 

In Mississippi, family money was not to be confused with wealth. It had nothing to do 
with cash or other assets. Family money was a status, obtained by someone who was 
white, somewhat educated beyond high school, born in a large home with a front porch— 
preferably one surrounded by cotton or soybean fields, although this was not 
mandatory—and partially reared by a beloved black maid named Bessie or Pearl, 
partially reared by doting grandparents who once owned the ancestors of Bessie or Pearl, 
and lectured from birth on the stringent social graces of a privileged people. Acreage and 
trust funds helped somewhat, but Mississippi was full of insolvent blue bloods who 
inherited the status of family money. It could not be earned. It had to be handed down at 
birth. 


When I talked to the Caudle family lawyer, he explained, rather succinctly, the real value 
of their family money. “They’re as poor as Job’s turkey,” he said as I sat deep in a worn 
leather chair and looked up at him across his wide and ancient mahogany desk. His name 
was Walter Sullivan, of the prestigious Sullivan & O’Hara firm. Prestigious for Ford 
County—seven lawyers. He studied the bankruptcy petition and rambled on about the 
Caudles and the money they used to have and how foolish they’d been in running a once 
profitable paper into the ground. He’d represented them for thirty years, and back when 
Miss Emma ran things the Times had five thousand subscribers and pages filled with 
advertisements. She kept a $500,000 certificate of deposit at Security Bank, just for a 
rainy day. 

Then her husband died, and she remarried a local alcoholic twenty years her junior. When 
sober, he was semiliterate and fancied himself as a tortured poet and essayist. Miss Emma 
loved him dearly and installed him as coeditor, a position he used to write long editorials 
blasting everything that moved in Ford County. It was the beginning of the end. Spot 
hated his new stepfather, the feelings were mutual, and their relationship finally climaxed 
with one of the more colorful fistfights in the history of downtown Clanton. It took place 
on the sidewalk in front of the Times office, on the downtown square, in front of a large 
and stunned crowd. The locals believed that Spot’s brain, already fragile, took additional 
damage that day. Shortly thereafter, he began writing nothing but those damned 
obituaries. 

The stepfather ran off with her money, and Miss Emma, heartbroken, become a recluse. 

“It was once a fine paper,” Mr. Sullivan said. “But look at it now. Less than twelve 
hundred subscriptions, heavily in debt. Bankrupt.” 

“What will the court do?” I asked. 

“Try and find a buyer.” 

“A buyer?” 

“Yes, someone will buy. The county has to have a newspaper.” 

I immediately thought of two people—Nick Diener and BeeBee. Nick’s family had 
become rich off their county weekly. BeeBee was already loaded and she had only one 
beloved grandchild. My heart began pounding as I smelled opportunity. 

Mr. Sullivan watched me intently, and it was obvious he knew what I was thinking. “It 
could be bought for a song,” he said. 

“How much?” I asked with all the confidence of a twenty-three-year-old cub reporter 
whose grandmother was as stout as lye soap. 


“Probably fifty thousand. Twenty-five for the paper, twenty-five to operate. Most of the 
debts can be bankrupted, then renegotiated with the creditors you need.” He paused and 
leaned forward, elbows on his desk, thick grayish eyebrows twitching as if his brain was 
working overtime. “It could be a real gold mine, you know.” 

*** 

BeeBee had never invested in a gold mine, but after three days of priming the pump I left 
Memphis with a check for $50,000. I gave it to Mr. Sullivan, who put it in a trust account 
and petitioned the court for the sale of the paper. The Judge, a relic who belonged in the 
bed next to Miss Emma, nodded benignly and scrawled his name on an order that made 
me the new owner of The Ford County Times. 

It takes at least three generations to be accepted in Ford County. Regardless of money or 
breeding, one cannot simply move there and be trusted. A dark cloud of suspicion hangs 
over any newcomer, and I was no exception. The people there are exceedingly warm and 
gracious and polite, almost to the point of being nosy with their friendliness. They nod 
and speak to everyone on the downtown streets. They ask about your health, the weather, 
and they invite you to church. They rush to help strangers. 

Hut they don’t really trust you unless they trusted your grandfather. 

Once word spread that I, a young green alien from Memphis, had bought the paper for 
fifty, or maybe a hundred, or perhaps even two hundred thousand dollars, a great wave of 
gossip shook the community. Margaret gave me the updates. Because I was single, there 
was a chance I was a homosexual. Because I went to Syracuse, wherever that was, then I 
was probably a Communist. Or worse, a liberal. Because I was from Memphis, I was a 
subversive intent on embarrassing Ford County. 

Just the same, as they all conceded quietly among themselves, I now controlled the 
obituaries! I was somebody! 

The new Times debuted on March 18, 1970, only three weeks after the midget arrived 
with his papers. It was almost an inch thick and loaded with more photos than had ever 
been published in a county weekly. Cub Scout troops, Brownies, junior high basketball 
teams, garden clubs, book clubs, tea clubs, Bible study groups, adult softball teams, civic 
clubs. Dozens of photos. I tried to include every living soul in the county. And the dead 
ones were exhalted like never before. The obits were embarrassingly long. I’m sure Spot 
was proud, but I never heard from him. 


The news was light and breezy. Absolutely no editorials. People love to read about crime, 
so on the bottom left-hand corner of the front page I launched the Crime Notes Section. 
Thankfully, two pickups had been stolen the week before, and I covered these heists as if 
Fort Knox had been looted. 

In the center of the front page there was a rather large group shot of the new regime— 
Margaret, Hardy, Baggy Suggs, me, our photographer, Wiley Meek, Davey Bigmouth 
Bass, and Melanie Dogan, a high school student and part-time employee. I was proud of 
my staff. We had worked around the clock for ten days, and our first edition was a great 
success. We printed five thousand copies and sold them all. I sent a box of them to 
BeeBee, and she was most impressed. 

For the next month, the new Times slowly took shape as I struggled to determine what I 
wanted it to become. Change is painful in rural Mississippi, so I decided to do it 
gradually. The old paper was bankrupt, but it had changed little in fifty years. I wrote 
more news, sold more ads, included more and more pictures of groups of endless 
varieties. And I worked hard on the obituaries. 

I had never been attracted to long hours, but since I was the owner I forgot about the 
clock. I was too young and too busy to be scared. I was twenty-three, and through luck 
and timing and a rich grandmother, I was suddenly the owner of a weekly newspaper. If I 
had hesitated and studied the situation, and sought advice from bankers and accountants, 
I’m sure someone would have talked some sense into me. But when you’re twenty-three, 
you’re fearless. You have nothing, so there’s nothing to lose. 

I figured it would take a year to become profitable. And, at first, revenue increased 
slowly. Then Rhoda Kassellaw was murdered. I guess it’s the nature of the business to 
sell more papers after a brutal crime when people want details. We sold twenty-four 
hundred papers the week before her death, and almost four thousand the week after. 

It was no ordinary murder. 

*** 

Ford County was a peaceful place, filled with people who were either Christians or 
claimed to be. Fistfights were common, but they were usually the work of the lower 
classes who hung around beer joints and such. Once a month a redneck would take a shot 
at a neighbor or perhaps his own wife, and each weekend had at least one stabbing in the 
black tonks. Death rarely followed these episodes. 


I owned the paper for ten years, from 1970 to 1980, and we reported very few murders in 
Ford County. None was as brutal as Rhoda Kassellaw’s; none was as premeditated. 
Thirty years later, I still think about it every day. 

Chapter 2 

Rhoda Kassellaw lived in the Beech Hill community, twelve miles north of Clanton, in a 
modest gray brick house on a narrow, paved country road. The flower beds along the 
front of the house were weedless and received daily care, and between them and the road 
the long wide lawn was thick and well cut. The driveway was crushed white rock. 
Scattered down both sides of it was a collection of scooters and balls and bikes. Her two 
small children were always outdoors, playing hard, sometimes stopping to watch a 
passing car. 

It was a pleasant little country house, a stone’s throw from Mr. and Mrs. Deece next door. 
The young man who bought it was killed in a trucking accident somewhere in Texas, and, 
at the age of twenty-eight, Rhoda became a widow. The insurance on his life paid off the 
house and the car. The balance was invested to provide a modest monthly income that 
allowed her to remain home and dote on the children. She spent hours outside, tending 
her vegetable garden, potting flowers, pulling weeds, mulching the beds along the front 
of the house. 

She kept to herself. The old ladies in Beech Hill considered her a model widow, staying 
home, looking sad, limiting her social appearances to an occasional visit to church. She 
should attend more regularly, they whispered. 

Shortly after the death of her husband, Rhoda planned to return to her family in Missouri. 
She was not from Ford County, nor was her husband. A job took them there. But the 
house was paid for, the kids were happy, the neighbors were nice, and her family was 
much too concerned about how much life insurance she’d collected. So she stayed, 
always thinking of leaving but never doing so. 

Rhoda Kassellaw was a beautiful woman when she wanted to be, which was not very 
often. Her shapely, thin figure was usually camouflaged under a loose cotton drip-dry 
dress, or a bulky chambray workshirt, which she preferred when gardening. She wore 
little makeup and kept her long flaxen-colored hair pulled back and stuck together on top 
of her head. Most of what she ate came from her organic garden, and her skin had a soft 
healthy glow to it. Such an attractive young widow would normally have been a hot 
property in the county, but she kept to herself. 

After three years of mourning, however, Rhoda became restless. She was not getting 
younger; the years were slipping by. She was too young and too pretty to sit at home 


every Saturday and read bedtime stories. There had to be some action out there, though 
there was certainly none in Beech Hill. 

She hired a young black girl from down the road to baby-sit, and Rhoda drove north for 
an hour to the Tennessee line, where she’d heard there were some respectable lounges 
and dance clubs. Maybe no one would know her there. She enjoyed the dancing and the 
flirting, but she never drank and always came home early. It became a routine, two or 
three times a month. 

Then the jeans got tighter, the dancing faster, the hours longer and longer. She was 
getting noticed and talked about in the bars and clubs along the state line. 

He followed her home twice before he killed her. It was March, and a warm front had 
brought a premature hope of spring. It was a dark night, with no moon. Bear, the family 
mutt, sniffed him first as he crept behind a tree in the backyard. Bear was primed to 
growl and bark when he was forever silenced. 

Rhoda’s son Michael was five and her daughter Teresa was three. They wore matching 
Disney cartoon pajamas, neatly pressed, and watched their mother’s glowing eyes as she 
read them the story of Jonah and the whale. She tucked them in and kissed them good 
night, and when Rhoda turned off the light to their bedroom, he was already in the house. 

An hour later she turned off the television, locked the doors, and waited for Bear, who 
did not appear. That was no surprise because he often chased rabbits and squirrels into 
the woods and came home late. Bear would sleep on the back porch and wake her 
howling at dawn. In her bedroom, she slipped out of her light cotton dress and opened the 
closet door. He was waiting in there, in the dark. 

He snatched her from behind, covered her mouth with a thick and sweaty hand, and said, 
“I have a knife. I’ll cut you and your kids.” With the other hand he held up a shiny blade 
and waved it before her eyes. 

“Understand?” he hissed into her ear. 

She trembled and managed to shake her head. She couldn’t see what he looked like. He 
threw her to the floor of the cluttered closet, face down, and yanked her hands behind her. 
He took a brown wool scarf an old aunt had given her and wrapped it roughly around her 
face. “Not one sound,” he kept growling at her. “Or I’ll cut your kids.” When the 
blindfold was finished he grabbed her hair, snatched her to her feet, and dragged her to 
her bed. He poked the tip of the blade into her chin and said, “Don’t fight me. The knife’s 
right here.” He cut off her panties and the rape began. 

He wanted to see her eyes, those beautiful eyes he’d seen in the clubs. And the long hair. 
He’d bought her drinks and danced with her twice, and when he’d finally made a move 
she had stiff-armed him. Try these moves, baby, he mumbled just loud enough for her to 
hear. 


He and the Jack Daniel’s had been building courage for three hours, and now the whiskey 
numbed him. He moved slowly above her, not rushing things, enjoying every second of it. 
He mumbled in the self-satisfying grunts of a real man taking and getting what he wanted. 

The smell of the whiskey and his sweat nauseated her, but she was too frightened to 
throw up. It might anger him, cause him to use the knife. As she started to accept the 
horror of the moment, she began to think. Keep it quiet. Don’t wake up the kids. And 
what will he do with the knife when he’s finished? 

His movements were faster, he was mumbling louder. “Quiet, baby,” he hissed again and 
again. “I’ll use the knife.” The wrought-iron bed was squeaking; didn’t get used enough, 
he told himself. Too much noise, but he didn’t care. 

The rattling of the bed woke Michael, who then got Teresa up. They eased from their 
room and crept down the dark hall to see what was happening. Michael opened the door 
to his mother’s bedroom, saw the strange man on top of her, and said, “Mommy!” For a 
second the man stopped and jerked his head toward the children. 

The sound of the boy’s voice horrified Rhoda, who bolted upward and thrust both hands 
at her assailant, grabbing whatever she could. One small fist caught him in the left eye, a 
solid shot that stunned him. Then she yanked off her blindfold while kicking with both 
legs. He slapped her and tried to pin her down again. “Danny Padgitt!” she shouted, still 
clawing. He hit her once more. 

“Mommy!” Michael cried. 

“Run, kids!” Rhoda tried to scream, but she was struck dumb by her assailant’s blows. 

“Shut up!” Padgitt yelled. 

“Run!” Rhoda shouted again, and the children backed away, then darted down the 
hallway, into the kitchen, and outside to safety. 

In the split second after she shouted his name, Padgitt realized he had no choice but to 
silence her. He took the knife and hacked twice, then scrambled from the bed and 
grabbed his clothing. 

*** 


Mr. and Mrs. Aaron Deece were watching late television from Memphis when they heard 
Michael’s voice calling and getting closer. Mr. Deece met the boy at the front door. His 
pajamas were soaked with sweat and dew and his teeth were chattering so violently he 
had trouble speaking. “He hurt my mommy!” he kept saying. “He hurt my mommy!” 

Through the darkness between the two houses, Mr. Deece saw Teresa running after her 
brother. She was almost running in place, as if she wanted to get to one place without 
leaving the other. When Mrs. Deece finally got to her by the Deece garage, she was 
sucking her thumb and unable to speak. 

Mr. Deece raced into his den and grabbed two shotguns, one for him, one for his wife. 
The children were in the kitchen, shocked to the point of being paralyzed. “He hurt 
Mommy,” Michael kept saying. Mrs. Deece cuddled them, told them everything would 
be fine. She looked at her shotgun when her husband laid it on the table. “Stay here,” he 
said as he rushed out of the house. 

He did not go far. Rhoda almost made it to the Deece home before she collapsed in the 
wet grass. She was completely naked, and from the neck down covered in blood. He 
picked her up and carried her to the front porch, then shouted at his wife to move the 
children toward the back of the house and lock them in a bedroom. He could not allow 
them to see their mother in her last moments. 

As he placed her in the swing, Rhoda whispered, “Danny Padgitt. It was Danny Padgitt.” 

He covered her with a quilt, then called an ambulance. 

*** 

Danny Padgitt kept his pickup in the center of the road and drove ninety miles an hour. 
He was half-drunk and scared as hell but unwilling to admit it. He’d be home in ten 
minutes, secure in the family’s little kingdom known as Padgitt Island. 

Those little faces had ruined everything. He’d think about it tomorrow. He took a long 
pull on the fifth of Jack Daniel’s and felt better. 

It was a rabbit or a small dog or some varmint, and when it darted from the shoulder he 
caught a glimpse of it and reacted badly. He instinctively hit the brake pedal, just for a 
split second because he really didn’t care what he hit and rather enjoyed the sport of 
roadkilling, but he’d punched too hard. The rear tires locked and the pickup fishtailed. 
Before he realized it Danny was in serious trouble. He jerked the wheel one way, the 
wrong way, and the truck hit the gravel shoulder where it began to spin like a stock car 


on the backstretch. It slid into the ditch, flipped twice, then crashed into a row of pine 
trees. If he’d been sober he would’ve been killed, but drunks walk away. 

He crawled out through a shattered window, and for a long while leaned on the truck, 
counting his cuts and scratches and considering his options. A leg was suddenly stiff, and 
as he climbed up the bank to the road he realized he could not walk far. Not that he would 
need to. 

The blue lights were on him before he realized it. The deputy was out of the car, 
surveying the scene with a long black flashlight. More flashing lights appeared down the 
road. 

The deputy saw the blood, smelled the whiskey, and reached for the handcuffs. 

Chapter 3 

The Big Brown River drops nonchalantly south from Tennessee and runs as straight as a 
hand-dug channel for thirty miles through the center of Tyler County, Mississippi. Two 
miles above the Ford County line it begins twisting and looping, and by the time it leaves 
Tyler County it looks like a scared snake, curling desperately and going nowhere. Its 
water is thick and heavy, muddy and slow, shallow in most places. The Big Brown is not 
known for its beauty. Sand, silt, and gravel bars line its innumerable bends and curves. A 
hundred sloughs and creeks feed it with an inexhaustible supply of slow-moving water. 

Its journey through Ford County is brief. It dips and forms a wide circle around two 
thousand acres in the northeasternmost corner of the county, then leaves and heads back 
toward Tennessee. The circle is almost perfect and an island is almost formed, but at the 
last moment the Big Brown turns away from itself and leaves a narrow strip of land 
between its banks. 

The circle is known as Padgitt Island, a deep, dense woodland covered in pine, gum, elm, 
oak, and a myriad of swamps and bayous and sloughs, some connected but most isolated. 
Little of the rich soil had ever been cleared. Nothing was harvested on the island except 
timber and lots of corn for illegal whiskey. And marijuana, but that was a later story. 

On the thin strip of land between the banks of the Big Brown a paved road entered and 
left, came and went, always with someone watching. The road was built long ago by the 
county, but very few taxpayers ever dared to use it. 

The entire island had been in the Padgitt family since Reconstruction, when Rudolph 
Padgitt, a carpetbagger from the North, arrived a bit late after the War and found all the 
prime land taken. He searched in vain, found nothing attractive, then somehow stumbled 


upon the snake-infested island. On the map, it looked promising. He put together a band 
of newly freed slaves and, with guns and machetes, fought his way onto the island. No 
one else wanted it. 

Rudolph married a local whore and began cutting timber. Since timber was in great 
demand after the War, he became prosperous. The local proved to be quite fertile and 
soon there was a horde of little Padgitts on the island. One of his ex-slaves had learned 
the art of distillery. Rudolph became a corn farmer who neither ate nor sold his crop, but 
instead used it to produce what was soon known as one of the finest whiskeys in the Deep 
South. 

For thirty years Rudolph made moonshine until he died of cirrhosis in 1902. By then an 
entire clan of Padgitts inhabited the island, and were quite proficient at milling timber 
and producing illegal whiskey. Scattered about the island were half a dozen distilleries, 
all well protected and concealed, all operating with state-of-the-art machinery. 

The Padgitts were famous for their whiskey, though fame was not something they sought. 
They were secretive and clannish, fiercely private and deathly afraid that someone might 
infiltrate their little kingdom and disrupt their considerable profits. They said they were 
loggers, and it was well known that they produced timber and were prosperous at it. The 
Padgitt Lumber Company was very visible on the main highway near the river. They 
claimed to be legitimate people, taxpayers and such, with their children in the public 
schools. 

During the 1920s and 1930s, when alcohol was illegal and the nation was thirsty, Padgitt 
whiskey could not be distilled fast enough. It was shipped in oak barrels across the Big 
Brown and hauled by trucks up North, as far away as Chicago. The patriarch, president, 
and director of production and marketing was a tight-fisted old warrior named Clovis 
Padgitt, eldest son of Rudolph and the local. Clovis had been taught at an early age that 
the best profits were those from which no taxes were extracted. That was lesson number 
one. Number two preached the marvelous message of dealing strictly in cash. Clovis was 
a hard-nosed cash and no-taxes man, and the Padgitts were rumored to have more money 
than the Mississippi state treasury. 

In 1938, three revenue agents sneaked across the Big Brown in a rented flatboat in search 
of the source of Old Padgitt. Their covert invasion of the island was flawed in many ways, 
the obvious being the original idea itself. But for some reason they chose midnight as 
their hour to cross the river. They were dismembered and buried in deep graves. 

In 1943, a strange event occurred in Ford County—an honest man was elected Sheriff. Or 
High Sheriff, as he is commonly known. His name was Koonce Lantrip, and he wasn’t 
really that honest but certainly sounded good on the stump. He vowed to end corruption, 
to clean up county government, to put the bootleggers and moonshiners, even the Padgitts, 
out of business. It made for a nice speech and Lantrip won by eight votes. 


His supporters waited and waited, and, finally, six months after taking office he 
organized his deputies and crossed the Big Brown on the only bridge, an ancient wooden 
structure that had been built by the county in 1915 at the insistence of Clovis. The 
Padgitts sometimes used it in the springtime when the river was high. No one else was 
allowed to cross it. 

Two of the deputies were shot in the head, and Lantrip’s body was never found. It was 
carefully laid to rest on the banks of a swamp by three Padgitt Negroes. Buford, the eldest 
son of Clovis, supervised the burial. 

The massacre was hot news in Mississippi for weeks, and the Governor threatened to 
send in the National Guard. But the Second War was raging, and D-Day soon captured 
the attention of the country. There wasn’t much left of the National Guard anyway, and 
those who were able to light had little interest in attacking Padgitt Island. The beaches of 
Normandy would be more inviting. 

With the noble experiment of an honest Sheriff behind them, the good people of Ford 
County elected one from the old school. His name was Mackey Don Coley and his father 
had been the High Sheriff back in the twenties when Clovis was in charge of Padgitt 
Island. Clovis and the senior Coley had been rather close, and it was widely known that 
the Sheriff was a rich man because Old Padgitt was allowed to move so freely out of the 
county. When Mackey Don announced his candidacy, Buford sent him $50,000 in cash. 
Mackey Don won in a landslide. His opponent claimed to be honest. 

There was a widely held but unprofessed belief in Mississippi that a good Sheriff must be 
a little crooked to ensure law and order. Whiskey, whoring, and gambling were simply 
facts of life, and a good Sheriff must be knowledgeable in these affairs to properly 
regulate them and protect the Christians. Those vices could not be eliminated, so the High 
Sheriff must be able to coordinate them and synchronize the orderly flow of sin. For his 
coordinating efforts, he was to be paid a little extra from the purveyors of such 
wickedness. He expected it. Most of the voters expected it. No honest man could live on 
such a humble salary. No honest man could move quietly through the shadows of the 
underworld. 

For the better part of a hundred years following the Civil War, the Padgitts owned the 
Sheriffs of Ford County. They bought them outright with sacks of cash. Mackey Don 
Coley received a hundred thousand a year (it was rumored), and during election years he 
got whatever he needed. And they were generous with other politicians. They quietly 
bought and kept influence. They asked little; they just wanted to be left alone on their 
island. 

After the Second War, the demand for moonshine began a steady decline. Since 
generations of Padgitts had been schooled to operate outside the law, Buford and the 
family began to diversify into other forms of illicit commerce. Selling only timber was 
dull, and subject to too many market factors, and, most important, did not generate the 
piles of cash the family expected. They ran guns, stole cars, counterfeited, bought and 


burned buildings to collect insurance. For twenty years they operated a highly successful 
brothel on the county line, until it mysteriously burned in 1966. 

They were creative and energetic people, always scheming and searching for opportunity, 
always waiting for someone to rob. There were rumors, quite significant at times, that the 
Padgitts were members of the Dixie Mafia, a loose-knit gang of redneck thieves who ran 
rampant through the Deep South in the sixties. These rumors were never verified and 
were in fact discounted by many because the Padgitts were simply too secretive to share 
their business with anyone. Nonetheless, the rumors persisted for years, and the Padgitts 
were the source of endless gossip in the cafes and coffee shops around the square in 
Clanton. They were never considered local heroes, but certainly legends. 

In 1967, a younger Padgitt fled to Canada to avoid the draft. He drifted to California 
where he tried marijuana and realized he had a taste for it. After a few months as a 
peacenik, he got homesick and sneaked back to Padgitt Island. He brought with him four 
pounds of pot, which he shared with all his cousins, and they, too, were quite taken with 
it. He explained that the rest of the country, and primarily California, was toking like 
crazy. As usual, Mississippi was at least five years behind the trend. 

The stuff could be grown cheaply, then hauled to the cities where there was demand. His 
father, Gill Padgitt, grandson of Clovis, saw the opportunity, and soon many of the old 
cornfields were converted to cannabis. A two-thousand-foot strip of land was cleared for 
a runway and the Padgitts bought themselves an airplane. Within a year there were daily 
flights to the outskirts of Memphis and Atlanta, where the Padgitts had established their 
network. To their delight and with their help, marijuana finally became popular in the 
Deep South. 

The moonshining slowed considerably. The brothel was gone. The Padgitts had contacts 
in Miami and Mexico and the cash was coming in by the truckloads. For years, no one in 
Ford County had a hint that the Padgitts were trafficking in drugs. And they never got 
caught. No Padgitt was ever indicted for a drug-related offense. 

In fact, not a single Padgitt had ever been arrested. A hundred years of moonshining, 
stealing, gunrunning, gambling, counterfeiting, whoring, bribing, even killing, and 
eventually drug manufacturing, and not a single arrest. They were smart people, careful, 
deliberate, patient with their schemes. 

Then Danny Padgitt, Gill’s youngest son, was arrested for the rape and murder of Rhoda 
Kassellaw. 

Chapter 4 


Mr. Deece told me the next day that when he was certain Rhoda was dead he finally left 
her in the swing on the front porch. He went to his bathroom, where he stripped and 
showered and saw her blood spin down the drain. He changed into work clothes and 
waited for the police and the ambulance. He watched her house while holding a loaded 
shotgun, anxious to blast anything that moved. But there was no movement, no sound. In 
the distance he could barely hear a siren. 

His wife kept the children locked in the back bedroom, where she huddled with them in 
the bed, under a blanket. Michael kept asking about his mother, and who was that man? 
But Teresa was too traumatized to speak. She managed only a low groaning sound as she 
sucked her fingers and shook as if she were freezing. 

Before long Benning Road was alive with red and blue flashing lights. Rhoda’s body was 
photographed at length before it was taken away. Her home was cordoned off by a squad 
of deputies, led by Sheriff Coley himself. Mr. Deece, still holding his shotgun, gave his 
statement to an investigator, then to the Sheriff. 

Shortly after 2 A.M… a deputy arrived with the news that a doctor in town had been 
notified and had suggested that the children be brought in for a look. They rode in the 
backseat of a patrol car, Michael clutching Mr. Deece, and Teresa in the lap of his wife. 
At the hospital, they were given a mild sedative and placed together in a semiprivate 
room where the nurses brought them cookies and milk until they finally went to sleep. 
Later in the day an aunt arrived from Missouri and took them away. 

*** 

My phone rang seconds before midnight. It was Wiley Meek, the paper’s photographer. 
He’d picked up the story on the police scanner and was already hanging around the jail 
waiting to ambush the suspect. Cops were everywhere, he said, his excitement barely 
under control. Hurry, he urged me. This could be the big one. 

At the time I lived above an old garage next to a decaying but still grand Victorian 
mansion known as the Hocutt House. It was filled with elderly Hocutts, three sisters and 
a brother, and they took turns being my landlord. Their five-acre estate was a few blocks 
from the Clanton square and had been built a century earlier with family money. It was 
covered with trees, overgrown flower beds, thick patches of mature weeds, and enough 
animals to stock a game preserve. Rabbits, squirrels, skunks, possums, raccoons, a 
million birds, a frightening assortment of green and black snakes—all nonpoisonous I 
was reassured—and dozens of cats. But no dogs. The Hocutts hated dogs. Each cat had a 
name, and a major clause in my verbal lease was that I would respect the cats. 


Respect them I did. The four-room loft apartment was spacious and clean and cost me the 
ridiculous sum of $50 a month. If they wanted their cats respected at that price, fine with 
me. 

Their father, Miles Hocutt, had been an eccentric doctor in Clan-ton for decades. Their 
mother died during childbirth, and, according to local legend, Dr. Hocutt became very 
possessive of the children after her death. To protect them from the world, he concocted 
one of the biggest lies ever told in Ford County. He explained to his children that insanity 
ran deeply in the family, and thus they should never marry lest they produce some 
hideous strain of idiot offspring. His children worshiped him, believed him, and were 
probably already exposed to some measure of unbalance. They never married. The son, 
Max Hocutt, was eighty-one when he leased me the apartment. The twins, Wilma and 
Gilma, were seventy-seven, and Melberta, the baby, was seventy-three and completely 
out of her mind. 

It was Gilma, I think, who was peeking from the kitchen window as I descended the 
wooden stairway at midnight. A cat was asleep on the bottom step, directly in my path, 
but I respectfully stepped over it. I wanted to kick it into the street. 

Two cars were parked in the garage. One was my Spitfire, top up to keep the cats out, and 
the other was a long, shiny black Mercedes with red-and-white butcher knives painted on 
the doors. Under the knives were phone numbers in green paint. Someone had once told 
Mr. Max Hocutt that he could completely write off the cost of a new car, any car, if he 
used it for business and some sort of logo was painted on the doors. He bought a new 
Mercedes and became a knife sharpener. He said his tools were in the trunk. 

The car was ten years old and had been driven less than eight thousand miles. Their 
father had also preached to them the sinfulness of women driving, so Mr. Max was the 
chauffeur. 

I eased the Spitfire down the gravel drive and waved at Gilma peeking from behind the 
curtain. She jerked her head away and disappeared. The jail was six blocks away. I had 
slept for about thirty minutes. 

Danny Padgitt was being fingerprinted when I arrived. The Sheriff’s office was in the 
front section of the jail, and it was packed with deputies and reserves and volunteer 
firemen and everybody with access to a uniform and a police scanner. Wiley Meek met 
me on the front sidewalk. 

“It’s Danny Padgitt!” he said with great excitement. 

I stopped for a second and tried to think. “Who?” 

“Danny Padgitt, from the island.” 


I’d been in Ford County less than three months and had yet to meet a single Padgitt. They, 
as always, kept to themselves. But I’d heard various installments of their legend, with 
much more to follow. Telling Padgitt stories was a common form of entertainment in 
Ford County. 

Wiley gushed on, “I got some great shots just as they got him out of the car. Had blood 
all over him. Great pictures! The girl’s dead!” 

“What girl?” 

“The one he killed. Raped her too, at least that’s the rumor.” 

Danny Padgitt, I mumbled to myself as the sensational story began to sink in. I had my 
first glimpse of the headline, no doubt the boldest one the Times had run in many years. 
Poor old Spot had shied away from the jolting stories. Poor old Spot had gone bankrupt. I 
had other plans. 

We pushed our way inside and looked around for Sheriff Coley. I’d met him twice during 
my brief stint with the Times and I had been impressed with his polite and warm nature. 
He called me mister and said sir and ma’am to everyone, always with a smile. He’d been 
the Sheriff since the massacre in 1943, so he was pushing seventy years of age. He was 
tall and gaunt without the obligatory thick stomach required of most Southern sheriffs. 
On the surface he was a gentleman, and both times I’d met him I’d later wondered how 
such a nice man could be so corrupt. He emerged from a back room with a deputy, and I, 
practicing my assertive-ness, rushed to him. 

“Sheriff, just a couple of questions,” I said sternly. There were no other reporters present. 
His boys—the real deputies, the part-timers, the wannabes, the jackleg constables with 
homemade uniforms—they all got quiet and gave me their sneers. I was still very much 
the brash new rich boy who’d somehow wrangled control of their newspaper. I was a 
foreigner, with no right to barge in at a time like this and start asking questions. 

Sheriff Coley smiled as usual, as if these encounters happened all the time around 
midnight. “Yes sir, Mr. Traynor.” He had a slow rich drawl that was very soothing. This 
man couldn’t tell a lie, could he? 

“What can you tell us about the murder?” 

With his arms folded across his chest, he gave a few of the basics in copspeak. “While 
female, age thirty-one, was attacked in her home on Benning Road. Raped, stabbed, 
murdered. Can’t give you her name until we talk to her kinfolks.” 

“And you’ve made an arrest?” 

“Yes sir, but no details now. Just give us a couple of hours. We’re investigatin’. That’s all, 
Mr. Traynor.” 


“Rumor has it that you have Danny Padgitt in custody.” 

“I don’t deal in rumors, Mr. Traynor. Not in my profession. Yours neither.” 

Wiley and I drove to the hospital, sniffed around for an hour, heard nothing we could 
print, then drove to the scene on Benning Road. The cops had cordoned off the house and 
a few of the neighbors were huddled quietly behind a strand of yellow police ribbon near 
the mailbox. We eased next to them, listening intently, hearing almost nothing. They 
seemed too stunned to talk. After a few minutes of gawking at the house, we crept away. 

Wiley had a nephew who was a part-time deputy, and we found him guarding the Deece 
home where they were still inspecting the front porch and the swing where Rhoda took 
her last breath. We pulled him off to the side, behind a row of Mr. Deece’s crepe myrtles, 
and he told us everything. All off the record, of course, as if the gory details would 
somehow be kept quiet in Ford County. 

*** 

There were three small cafes around the square in Clanton, two for the whites, one for the 
blacks. Wiley suggested we get an early table and just listen. 

I do not eat breakfast, and I’m usually not awake during the hours in which it is served. I 
don’t mind working until midnight, but I prefer to sleep until the sun is overhead and in 
full view. As I quickly realized, one of the advantages of owning a small weekly was that 
I could work late and sleep late. The stories could be written anytime, as long as the 
deadlines were met. Spot himself was known to drift in not long before noon, after, of 
course, dropping by the funeral home. I liked his hours. 

The second day I lived in my apartment above the Hocutt garage, Gilma banged on my 
door at nine-thirty in the morning. And banged and banged. I finally staggered through 
my small kitchen in my underwear and saw her squinting through the blinds. She 
announced that she was just about to call the police. The other Hocutts were down below, 
wandering around the garage, looking at my car, certain that a crime had been committed. 

She asked what I was doing. I said that I had been sleeping until I heard somebody 
banging on the damned door. She asked me why I was still asleep at nine-thirty on a 
Wednesday morning. I rubbed my eyes and tried to think of an appropriate response. I 
was suddenly aware that I was almost nude and standing in the presence of a seventyseven-year-old virgin. She kept looking at my thighs. 


They’d been up since five, she explained. Nobody sleeps till nine-thirty in Clanton. Was I 
drunk? They were just concerned, that’s all. As I closed the door I told her I was sober, 
still sleepy, thanks for being concerned but I would often be in bed past 9 A.M. 

I’d been to the Tea Shoppe a couple of times for late morning coffee and once for lunch. 
As the owner of the paper, I felt it necessary to circulate and be seen, at a reasonable hour. 
I was keenly aware that I would be writing about Ford County, its people and places and 
happenings, for years to come. 

Wiley said the cafes would be crowded early. “Always after football games and car 
wrecks,” he said. 

“What about murders?” I asked. 

“It’s been a long time,” he said. 

He was right, the place was packed when we walked in, just after 6 A.M. He offered 
some hellos, shook some hands, exchanged a couple of insults. He was from Ford County 
and knew everyone. I nodded and smiled and caught the odd looks. It would take years. 
The people were friendly, but also wary of outsiders. 

We found two scats at the counter and I asked for coffee. Nothing else. The waitress did 
not approve of this. She warmed to Wiley, though, when he reconsidered and ordered 
scrambled eggs, country ham, biscuits, grits, and a side of hash browns, enough 
cholesterol to choke a mule. 

The talk was of the rape and murder and nothing else. If the weather could cause 
arguments, imagine what such a heinous crime could stir up. The Padgitts had had the run 
of the county for a hundred years; it was time to send ‘em all to jail. Surround the island 
with the National Guard if necessary. Mackey Don had to go; he’d been in their pockets 
for too long. Let a bunch of crooks run free and they think they’re above the law. Now 
this. 

Not much was said about Rhoda because little was known. Someone knew she’d been 
hanging around the lounges on the state line. Someone said she’d been sleeping with a 
local lawyer. Didn’t know his name. Just a rumor. 

The rumors roared around the Tea Shoppe. A couple of the loudmouths took turns 
holding court, and I was surprised at how reckless they were with their versions of the 
truth. Too bad I couldn’t print all the wonderful gossip we heard. 

Chapter 5 


We did, however, print a lot. The headline proclaimed that Rhoda Kassellaw had been 
raped and murdered, and that Danny Padgitt had been arrested for it. The headline 
could’ve been read from twenty yards down any sidewalk around the courthouse square. 

Under it were two photos; one of Rhoda as a senior in high school, and one of Padgitt as 
he was led into the jail in handcuffs. Wiley had ambushed him all right. It was a perfect 
shot, with Padgitt sneering at the camera. There was blood on his forehead from the 
wreck, and blood on his shirt from the attack. He looked nasty, mean, insolent, drunk, 
and guilty as hell, and I knew the photo would cause a sensation. Wiley thought we’d 
better avoid it, but I was twenty-three years old and too young to be restrained. I wanted 
my readers to see and know the ugly truth. I wanted to sell newspapers. 

The photo of Rhoda had been obtained from a sister in Missouri. The first time I talked to 
her, by phone, she had had almost nothing to say and quickly hung up. The second time 
she thawed just a little, said the children were being seen by a doctor, that the funeral 
would take place Tuesday afternoon in a small town near Springfield, and, as far as the 
family was concerned, the entire state of Mississippi could burn in hell. 

I told her that I understood completely, that I was from Syracuse, that I was one of the 
good guys. She finally agreed to send me a photo. 

Using a host of unnamed sources, I described in detail what happened the previous 
Saturday night on Benning Road. When I was sure of a fact, I drove it home. When I 
wasn’t so sure, I nibbled around the edges with enough innuendo to convey what I 
thought happened. Baggy Suggs sobered up long enough to reread and edit the stories. He 
probably kept us from getting sued or shot. 

On page two there was a map of the crime scene and a large photo of Rhoda’s home, one 
taken the morning after the crime, complete with cop cars and yellow police ribbon 
everywhere. The photo also included the bikes and toys of Michael and Teresa scattered 
around the front yard. In many ways, the photo was more ominous than one of the corpse 
itself, which I didn’t have but tried to get. The photo stated plainly that children lived 
there, and that children were involved in a crime so brutal that most Ford Countians were 
still trying to believe it really happened. 

How much did the children see? That was the burning question. 

I didn’t answer it in the Times, but I got as close as possible. I described the house and its 
interior layout. Using an unnamed source, I estimated that the children’s beds were about 
thirty feet from their mother’s. The children fled the house before Rhoda, they were in 
shock by the time they got next door, they were seen by a doctor in Clanton and were 
undergoing therapy of some nature back home in Missouri. They saw a lot. 

Would they testify at a trial? Baggy said there was no way; they were simply too young. 
But I pulled the question out of the air and posed it anyway, to give the readers something 


else to argue and fret over. After exploring the possibility of parading the children into a 
courtroom, I concluded that “experts” agreed that such a scenario was unlikely. Baggy 
enjoyed being considered an expert. 

Rhoda’s obituary was as long as I could possibly make it, which, given the tradition of 
the Times, was not unusual. 

We went to press about 10 P.M. on Tuesday night; the paper was in the racks around the 
Clanton square by 7 A.M. on Wednesday. The circulation had dropped to fewer than 
twelve hundred at the time of the bankruptcy, but after a month of my fearless leadership 
we had close to twenty-five hundred subscribers—five thousand was a realistic goal. 

For the Rhoda Kassellaw murder we printed eight thousand copies and put them 
everywhere—by the doors of the cafes around the square, in the halls of the courthouse, 
on the desks of every county employee, in the lobbies of the banks. We mailed three 
thousand free copies to potential subscribers, as part of a sudden, one-time special 
promotion effort. 

According to Wiley, it was the first murder in eight years. It was a Padgitt! It was a 
wonderfully sensational story and I saw it as my golden moment. Sure I went for the 
shock, for the sensational, for the bloodstains. Sure it was yellow journalism, but what 
did I care? 

I had no idea the response would be so quick and unpleasant. 

*** 

At 9 A.M.… Thursday morning, the main courtroom on the second floor of the Ford 
County Courthouse was full. It was the domain of the Honorable Reed Loopus, an aging 
Circuit Court Judge from Tyler County, who passed through Clanton eight times a year to 
dispense justice. He was a legendary old warrior who ruled with an iron fist and, 
according to Baggy—who spent most of his working life hanging around the courthouse 
either picking up gossip or creating it—was a thoroughly honest Judge who had 
somehow managed to avoid the tentacles of the Padgitt money. Perhaps because he was 
from another county, Judge Loopus believed criminals should serve long sentences, 
preferably at hard labor, though he could no longer order such. 

The Monday after the murder, the Padgitt lawyers had scrambled around trying to get 
Danny out of jail. Judge Loopus was preoccupied with a trial in another county—his 
district covered six of them—and he refused to be pushed into a quick bail hearing. 


Instead, he set the matter for 9 A.M. Thursday, thus allowing the town several days to 
ponder and speculate. 

Because I was a member of the press, indeed the owner of the local paper, I felt it was my 
duty to arrive early and get a good seat. Yes, I was a bit smug. The other spectators were 
there out of curiosity. I, however, had very important work to do. Baggy and I were 
sitting in the second row when the crowd began to assemble. 

Danny Padgitt’s principal lawyer was a character named Lucien Wilbanks, a man I would 
quickly learn to hate. He was what was left of a once prominent clan of lawyers and 
bankers and such. The Wilbanks family had worked long and hard to build Clanton, then 
Lucien came along and had pretty much ruined a fine family name. He fancied himself as 
a radical lawyer, which, for that part of the world in 1970, was quite rare. He wore a 
beard, swore like a sailor, drank heavily, and preferred clients who were rapists and 
murderers and child molesters. He was the only white member of the NAACP in Ford 
County, which alone was enough to get you shot there. He didn’t care. 

Lucien Wilbanks was abrasive and fearless and downright mean, and he waited until 
everyone was settled in the courtroom—just before Judge Loopus entered—to walk 
slowly over to me. He was holding a copy of the latest Times, which he began waving as 
he started swearing. “You little son of a bitch!” he said, quite loudly, and the courtroom 
became perfectly still. “Who in hell do you think you are?” 

I was too mortified to attempt an answer. I felt Baggy inch away. Every single person in 
the courtroom was staring at me, and I knew I had to say something. “Just telling the 
truth,” I managed to say with as much conviction as I could muster. 

“It’s yellow journalism!” he roared. “Sensational tabloid garbage!” The paper was just a 
few inches from my nose. 

“Thank you,” I said, like a real wise guy. There were at least five deputies in the 
courtroom, none of whom were showing any interest in breaking this up. 

“We’ll file suit tomorrow!” he said, his eyes glowing. “A million dollars in damages!” 

“I got lawyers,” I said, suddenly terrified that I was about to be as bankrupt as the Caudle 
family. Lucien tossed the paper into my lap, then turned and went back to his table. I was 
finally able to exhale; my heart was pounding. I could feel my cheeks burning from 
embarrassment and fear. 

But I managed to keep a stupid grin on my face. I couldn’t show the locals that I, the 
editor/publisher of their paper, was afraid of anything. But a million dollars in damages! I 
immediately thought of my grandmother in Memphis. That would be a difficult 
conversation. 


There was a commotion up behind the bench and a bailiff opened a door. “Everyone 
rise,” he announced. Judge Loopus crept through it and shuffled to his seat, his faded 
black robe trailing behind him. Once situated, he surveyed the crowd, and said, “Good 
morning. A rather nice turnout for a bail hearing.” Such routine matters generally 
attracted no one, except for the accused, his lawyer, and perhaps his mother. There were 
three hundred people watching this one. 

It wasn’t just a bail hearing. It was round one of a rape/murder trial, and few people in 
Clanton wanted to miss it. As I was keenly aware, most folks would not be able to attend 
the proceedings. They would rely on the Times, and I was determined to give them the 
details. 

Every time I looked at Lucien Wilbanks, I thought about the lawsuit for a million dollars. 
Surely he wasn’t going to sue my paper, was he? For what? There had been no libel, no 
defamation. 

Judge Loopus nodded at another bailiff and a side door opened. Danny Padgitt was 
escorted in, his hands cuffed at his waist. He was wearing a neatly pressed white shirt, 
khaki pants, and loafers. His face was clean shaven and free of any apparent injuries. He 
was twenty-four, a year older than me, but he looked much younger. He was clean cut, 
handsome, and I couldn’t help but think he ought to be in college somewhere. He 
managed a slow strut, then the sneer as the bailiff removed the handcuffs. He looked 
around at the crowd, and for a moment seemed to enjoy the attention. He showed all the 
confidence of someone whose family had unlimited cash, which it would use to get him 
out of his little jam. 

Seated directly in back of him, behind the bar in the first row, were his parents and 
various other Padgitts. His father Gill, grandson of the infamous Clovis Padgitt, had a 
college degree and was rumored to be the chief money launderer in the gang. His mother 
was well dressed and somewhat attractive, which I found unusual for someone dimwitted 
enough to marry into the Padgitt clan and spend the rest of her life secluded on the island. 

“I’ve never seen her before,” Baggy whispered to me. 

“How often have you seen Gill?” I asked. 

“Maybe twice, in the last twenty years.” 

The State was represented by the county prosecutor, a part-timer named Rocky Childers. 
Judge Loopus addressed him: “Mr. Childers, I assume the State is opposed to bail.” 

Childers stood and said, “Yes sir.” 

“On what grounds?” 


“The horrific nature of the crimes, Your Honor. A vicious rape, in the victim’s own bed, 
in front of her small children. A simultaneous murder caused by at least two knife 
wounds. The attempted flight of the accused, Mr. Padgitt.” Childers’s words cut through 
the hushed courtroom. “The great likelihood that if Mr. Padgitt leaves jail we will never 
see him again.” 

Lucien Wilbanks couldn’t wait to stand up and start bickering. He was on his feet 
immediately. “We object to that, Your Honor. My client has no criminal record 
whatsoever, never been arrested before.” 

Judge Loopus looked calmly over his reading glasses and said, “Mr. Wilbanks, I do hope 
that is the first and last time you interrupt anyone in this proceeding. I suggest you sit 
down, and when the Court is ready to hear from you, then you will be so advised.” His 
words were icy, almost bitter, and I wondered how many times these two had tangled in 
this very courtroom. 

Nothing bothered Lucien Wilbanks; his skin was as thick as rawhide. 

Childers then gave us a bit of history. Eleven years earlier, in 1959, a certain Gerald 
Padgitt had been indicted for stealing cars over in Tupelo. It took a year to find a couple 
of deputies willing to enter Padgitt Island to serve a warrant, and though they survived, 
they were unsuccessful. Gerald Padgitt either fled the country or secluded himself 
somewhere on the island. “Wherever he is,” Childers said, “he’s never been arrested, 
never been found.” 

“You ever hear of Gerald Padgitt?” I whispered to Baggy. 

“Nope.” 

“If this defendant is released on bail, Your Honor, we’ll never see him again. It’s that 
simple.” Childers sat down. 

“Mr. Wilbanks,” His Honor said. 

Lucien stood slowly and waved a hand at Childers. “As usual, the prosecutor is 
confused,” he began pleasantly. “Gerald Padgitt is not charged with these crimes. I don’t 
represent him and really don’t give a damn what happened to him.” 

“Watch your language,” Loopus said. 

“He’s not on trial here. This is about Danny Padgitt, a young man with no criminal record 
whatsoever.” 

“Does your client own real estate in this county?” Loopus asked. 

“No, he does not. He’s only twenty-four.” 


“Let’s get to the bottom line, Mr. Wilbanks. I know his family owns considerable acreage.
The only way I’ll grant bail is if it’s all pledged to secure his appearance for trial.”
“That’s outrageous,” Lucien growled.
“So are his alleged crimes.”


Lucien flung his legal pad onto the table. “Give me a minute to consult with the family.” 
This caused quite a stir among the Padgitts. They huddled behind the defense table with 
Wilbanks and there was disagreement from the very start. It was almost funny watching 
these very wealthy crooks shake their heads and get mad at each other. Family fights are 
quick and bitter, especially when money is at stake, and every Padgitt present seemed to 
have a different opinion about which course to take. One could only imagine what it was 
like when they were dividing their loot. 

Lucien sensed that an agreement was unlikely, and to avoid embarrassment he turned and 
addressed the Court. “That’s impossible, Your Honor,” he announced. “The Padgitt land 
is owned by at least forty people, most of them absent from this courtroom. What the 
Court is requiring is arbitrary and overly burdensome.” 

“I’ll give you a few days to put it together,” Loopus said, obviously enjoying the 

discomfort he was causing.
“No sir. It’s just not fair. My client is entitled to a reasonable bail, same as any other
defendant.”


“Then bail is denied until the preliminary hearing.”
“We waive the preliminary.”
“As you wish,” Loopus said, taking notes.
“And we request that the case be presented to the grand jury as soon as possible.”
“In due course, Mr. Wilbanks, same as all other cases.”
“Because we will move for a change of venue as soon as possible.” Lucien said this


boldly, as if an important proclamation was needed.
“It’s a bit early for that, don’t you think?” Loopus said.
“It will be impossible for my client to get a fair trial in this county.” Wilbanks was gazing


around the courtroom as he continued, almost ignoring the Judge, who, for the moment, 
seemed curious. 


“An effort is already under way to indict, try, and convict my client before he has the 
chance to defend himself, and I think the Court should intervene immediately with a gag 
order.” 

Lucien Wilbanks was the only one who needed gagging. 

“Where are you going with this, Mr. Wilbanks?” Loopus asked. 

“Have you seen the local paper, Your Honor?” 

“Not lately.” 

All eyes seemed to settle upon me, and once again my heart stopped dead still. 

Wilbanks glared at me as he continued. “Front page stories, bloody photographs, 
unnamed sources, enough half-truths and innuendos to convict any innocent man!” 

Baggy was inching away again, and I was very much alone. 

Lucien stomped across the courtroom and tossed a copy up to the bench. “Take a look at 
this,” he growled. Loopus adjusted his reading glasses, pulled the Times up high, and 
sank back into his fine leather chair. He began reading, apparently in no particular hurry. 

He was a slow reader. At some point my heart began functioning again, returning with 
the fury of a jackhammer. And I noticed my collar was wet where it rested on the back of 
my neck. Loopus finished the front page and slowly opened it up. The courtroom was 
silent. Would he toss me into jail right there? Nod to a bailiff to slap handcuffs on me and 
drag me away? I wasn’t a lawyer. I’d just been threatened with a million-dollar lawsuit, 
by a man who’d certainly filed many, and now the Judge was reading my rather lurid 
accounts while the entire town waited for his verdict. 

A lot of hard glances were coming my way, so I found it easier to scribble on my 
reporter’s pad, though I couldn’t read anything I was writing. I worked hard at keeping a 
straight face. What I really wanted to do was bolt from the courtroom and race back to 
Memphis. 

Pages rattled, and His Honor was finally finished. He leaned slightly forward to the 
microphone and uttered words that would instantly make my career. He said, “It’s very 
well written. Engaging, perhaps a bit macabre, but certainly nothing out of line.” 

I kept scribbling, as if I hadn’t heard this. In a sudden, unforeseen, and rather harrowing 
skirmish, I had just prevailed over the Padgitts and Lucien Wilbanks. “Congratulations,” 
Baggy whispered. 


Loopus refolded the newspaper and laid it down. He allowed Wilbanks to rant and rave 
for a few minutes about leaks from the cops, leaks from the prosecutor’s office, potential 
leaks from the grand jury room, all of them somehow coordinated by a conspiracy of 
unnamed people determined to treat his client unfairly. What he was really doing was 
performing for the Padgitts. He had lost his attempt to get bail, so he had to impress them 
with his zealousness. 

Loopus bought none of it. 

As we would soon learn, Lucien’s act had been nothing but a smokescreen. He had no 
intention of moving the case from Ford County. 

Chapter 6 

When I bought the Times, its prehistoric building came with the deal. It had very little 
value. It was on the south side of the Clanton square, one of four decaying structures built 
wall to wall by someone in a hurry; long and narrow, three levels, with a basement that 
all employees feared and shied away from. There were several offices in the front, all 
with stained and threadbare carpet, peeling walls, the smell of last century’s pipe smoke 
forever fused to the ceilings. 

In the rear, as far away as possible, was the printing press. Every Tuesday night, Hardy, 
our pressman, somehow coaxed the old letterpress to life and managed to produce yet 
another edition of our paper. His space was rank with the sharp odor of printer’s ink. 

The room on the first floor was lined with bookshelves sagging under the weight of dusty 
tomes that had not been opened in decades; collections of history and Shakespeare and 
Irish poetry and rows of badly outdated British encyclopedias. Spot thought such books 
would impress anyone who ventured in. 

Standing in the front window, and looking through dingy panes of glass, across which 
someone had long ago painted the word “TIMES,” one could see the Ford County 
Courthouse and the bronze Confederate sentry guarding it. A plaque below his feet listed 
the names of the sixty-one county boys who died in the Great War, most at Shiloh. 

The sentry could also be seen from my office, which was on the second floor. It, too, was 
lined with bookshelves holding Spot’s personal library, an eclectic collection that 
appeared to have been as neglected as the one downstairs. It would be years before I 
moved any of his books. 

The office was spacious, cluttered, filled with useless artifacts and worthless files and 
adorned with fake portraits of Confederate generals. I loved the place. When Spot left he 


took nothing, and after a few months no one seemed to want any of his junk. So it 
remained where it was, neglected as always, virtually untouched by me, and slowly 
becoming my property. I boxed up his personal things—letters, bank statements, notes, 
postcards—and stored them in one of the many unused rooms down the hall where they 
continued to gather dust and slowly rot. 

My office had two sets of French doors that opened to a small porch with a wrought-iron 
railing, and there was enough room out there for four people to sit in wicker chairs and 
watch the square. Not that there was much to see, but it was a pleasant way to pass the 
time, especially with a drink. 

Baggy was always ready for a drink. He brought a bottle of bourbon after dinner, and we 
assumed our positions in the rockers. The town was still buzzing over the bail hearing. It 
had been widely assumed that Danny Padgitt would be sprung as soon as Lucien 
Wilbanks and Mackey Don Coley could get matters arranged. Promises would be made, 
money would change hands, Sheriff Coley would somehow personally guarantee the 
boy’s appearance at trial. But Judge Loopus had other plans. 

Baggy’s wife was a nurse. She worked the night shift in the emergency room at the 
hospital. He worked days, if his rather languid observations of the town could be 
considered labor. They rarely saw each other, which was evidently a good thing because 
they fought constantly. Their adult children had fled, leaving the two of them to wage 
their own little war. After a couple of drinks, Baggy always began the cutting remarks 
about his wife. He was fifty-two, looked at least seventy, and I suspected that the booze 
was the principal reason he was aging badly and lighting at home. 

“We kicked their butts,” he said proudly. “Never before has a newspaper story been so 
clearly exonerated. Right there in open court.” 

“What’s a gag order?” I asked. I was an ill-informed rookie, and everybody knew it. No 
sense in pretending I knew something when I didn’t. 

“I’ve never seen one. I’ve heard of them, and I think they’re used by judges to shut up the 
lawyers and the litigants.” 

“So they don’t apply to newspapers?” 

“Never. Wilbanks was grandstanding, that’s all. The guy is a member of the ACLU, only 
one in Ford County. He understands the First Amendment. There’s no way a court can 
tell a newspaper not to print something. He was having a bad day, it was apparent his 
client was staying in jail, so he had to showboat. Typical maneuver by lawyers. They 
teach it in law school.” 

“So you don’t think we’ll get sued?” 


“Hell no. Look, first of all, there’s no lawsuit. We didn’t libel or defame anyone. Sure we 
got kinda loose with some of the facts, but it was all small stuff, and it was probably true 
anyway. Second, if Wilbanks had a lawsuit he would have to file it here, in Ford County. 
Same courthouse, same courtroom, same Judge. The Honorable Reed Loopus, who, this 
morning, read our stories and declared them to be just fine. The lawsuit was shot down 
before Wilbanks typed the first word. Brilliant.” 

I certainly didn’t feel brilliant. I’d been worrying about the million dollars in damages 
and wondering where I might find such a sum. The bourbon was finally settling in and I 
relaxed. It was Thursday night in Clanton and few people were out. Every shop and store 
and office around the square was locked tight. 

Baggy, as usual, had been relaxed for a long time. Margaret had whispered to me that he 
often had bourbon for breakfast. He and a one-legged lawyer called Major liked to have a 
nip with their coffee. They would meet on the balcony outside Major’s office across the 
square and smoke and drink and argue law and politics while the courthouse came to life. 
Major lost a leg at Guadalcanal, according to his version of the Second War. His law 
practice was specialized to the point that he did nothing but type wills for the elderly. He 
typed them himself—had no need for a secretary. He worked about as hard as Baggy, and 
the two were often seen in the courtroom, half-soused, watching yet another trial. 

“I guess Mackey Don’s got the boy in the suite,” Baggy said, his words starting to slur. 

“The suite?” I asked. 

“Yeah—have you seen the jail?” 

“No.” 

“It’s not fit for animals. No heat, no air, plumbing works about half the time. Filthy 
conditions. Rotten food. And that’s for the whites. The blacks are at the other end, all in 
one long cell. Their only toilet is a hole in the floor.” 

“I think I’ll pass.” 

“It’s an embarrassment to the county, but, sadly, it’s the same in most places around here. 
Anyway, there’s one little cell with air conditioning and carpet on the floor, one clean 
bed, color television, good food. It’s called the suite and Mackey Don puts his favorites 
there.” 

I was mentally taking notes. To Baggy, it was business as usual. To me, a recent college 
attendee and sometime journalism student, a real muckraking story was in the works. 
“You think Padgitt’s in the suite?” 

“Probably. He came to court in his own clothes.” 


“As opposed to?” 

“Those orange jail coveralls everybody else wears. You haven’t seen them?” 

Yes, I had seen them. I had been in court one time, a month or so earlier, and I suddenly 
recalled seeing two or three defendants sitting in the courtroom, waiting for a judge, all 
wearing different shades of faded orange coveralls. “Ford County Jail” was printed across 
the front and back of the shirts. 

Baggy took a sip and expounded. “You see, for the preliminary hearings and such, the 
defendants, if they’re still in jail, always come to court dressed like prisoners. In the old 
days, Mackey Don would make them wear the coveralls even during their trials. Lucien 
Wilbanks got a guilty verdict reversed on the grounds that the jury was predisposed to 
convict since his client certainly looked guilty as hell in his orange jail suit. And he was 
right. Kinda hard to convince a jury you’re not guilty when you’re dressed like an inmate 
and wearing rubber shower shoes.” 

I marveled once again at the backwardness of Mississippi. I could see a criminal 
defendant, especially a black one, facing a jury and expecting a fair trial, wearing jail 
garb designed to be spotted from half a mile away. “Still fightin’ the War,” was a slogan 
I’d heard several times in Ford County. There was a frustrating resistance to change, 
especially where crime and punishment were concerned. 

*** 

Around noon the following day I walked to the jail looking for Sheriff Coley. Under the 
pretext of asking him questions about the Kassellaw investigation, I planned to see as 
many of the inmates as possible. His secretary informed me, rather rudely, that he was in 
a meeting, and that was fine with me. 

Two prisoners were cleaning the front offices. Outside, two more were pulling weeds 
from a flower bed. I walked around the block and behind the jail I saw a small open area 
with a basketball goal. Six prisoners were loitering under the shade of a small oak tree. 
On the east side of the jail I saw three prisoners standing in a window, behind bars, 
gazing down at me. 

Thirteen inmates in all. Thirteen orange suits. 

Wiley’s nephew was consulted about things around the jail. At first he was reluctant to 
talk, but he had a deep hatred of Sheriff Coley, and he thought he could trust me. He 
confirmed what Baggy had suspected—Danny Padgitt was living the good life in an air


conditioned cell and eating whatever he wanted. He dressed as he wished, played 
checkers with the Sheriff himself, and made phone calls all day long. 

*** 

The next edition of the Times did much to solidify my reputation as a hard-charging, 
fearless, twenty-three-year-old fool. On the front page was a huge photo of Danny Padgitt 
being led into the courthouse for his bail hearing. He was handcuffed and wore street 
clothes. He was also giving the camera one of his patented go-to-hell looks. Just above it 
was the massive headline: BAIL DENIED FOR DANNY PADGITT. The story was 
lengthy and detailed. 

Alongside was another story, almost as long and much more scandalous. Quoting 
unnamed sources, I described at length the conditions of Mr. Padgitt’s incarceration. I 
mentioned every possible perk he was getting, including personal time with Sheriff Coley 
over the checkerboard. I talked about his food and diet, color television, unlimited phone 
use. Everything I could possibly verify. Then I compared this with how the other twentyone inmates were living. 

On page two, I ran an old black-and-white file photo of four defendants being led into the 
courthouse. Each, of course, was wearing the coveralls. Each had handcuffs and unruly 
hair. I blacked out their faces so, whoever they were, they would not suffer any more 
embarrassment. Their cases had long since been closed. 

I’d placed another picture of Danny Padgitt as he was led into the courthouse next to the 
file photo. Except for the handcuffs, he could’ve been on his way to a party. The contrast 
was startling. The boy was being pampered by Sheriff Coley, who, so far, had refused to 
discuss the matter with me. Big mistake. 

In the story, I detailed my efforts to chat with the Sheriff. My phone calls had not been 
returned. I’d gone to the jail twice and he wouldn’t meet with me. I’d left a list of 
questions for him, which he chose to ignore. I painted the picture of an aggressive young 
reporter desperately searching for the truth and being stiff-armed by an elected official. 

Since Lucien Wilbanks was one of the least popular men in Clanton, I included him in 
the fray. Using the phone, which I was quickly learning was a great equalizer, I called his 
office four times before he called me back. At first he had no comment about his client or 
the charges, but when I persisted with questions about his treatment at the jail he erupted. 
“I don’t run the damned jail, son!” he growled, and I could almost see his red eyes 
glowing at me. I quoted him on that. 


“Have you interviewed your client at the jail?” I asked. 

“Of course.” 

“What was he wearing?” 

“Don’t you have better things to report?” 

“No sir. What was he wearing?” 

“Well he wasn’t naked.” 

That was too good a quote to pass up, so I put it in bold print in a sidebar. 

With a rapist/murderer, a corrupt Sheriff, and a radical lawyer on one side, and me 
standing alone on the other, I knew I couldn’t lose the fight. The response to the story 
was astounding. Baggy and Wiley reported that the cafes were buzzing with admiration 
for the fearless young editor of the paper. The Padgitts and Lucien had been despised for 
a long time. Now it was time to get rid of Coley. 

Margaret said we were swamped with phone calls from readers incensed with the soft 
treatment Danny was receiving. Wiley’s nephew reported that the jail was in chaos and 
Mackey Don was at war with his deputies. He was coddling a murderer—1971 was an 
election year. Folks were angry out there and they might all lose their jobs. 

*** 

Those two weeks at the Times were crucial to its survival. The readers were hungry for 
details, and, through timing, dumb luck, and some guts, I gave them just what they 
wanted. The paper was suddenly alive; it was a force. It was trusted. The people wanted it 
to report with detail and without fear. 

Baggy and Margaret told me that Spot would have never used the bloody pictures and 
challenged the Sheriff. But they were still quite timid. I can’t say that my brashness had 
in any way emboldened my stall”. The Times was, and would be, a one-man show with a 
rather weak supporting staff. 

Little did I care. I was telling the truth and damning the consequences. I was a local hero. 
Subscriptions jumped to almost three thousand. Ad revenue doubled. Not only was I 
shining a new light into the county, I was making money at the same time. 


Chapter 7 

The bomb was a rather basic incendiary device that, if detonated, would have quickly 
engulfed our printing room. There the fire would have been energized by various 
chemicals and no less than 110 gallons of printer’s ink, and would have raced quickly 
through the front offices. After a few minutes, with no sprinkler system and no alarms, 
who knows how much of the upper two floors could have been saved. Probably not much. 
It was very likely that the fire, if properly detonated in the early hours of Thursday 
morning, would’ve burned most of the four buildings in our row. 

It was discovered sitting ominously, still intact, next to a pile of old papers in the printing 
room, by the village idiot. Or, I should say, one of the village idiots. Clanton had more 
than its share. 

His name was Piston, and he, like the building and the ancient press and the untouched 
libraries upstairs and down, came with the deal. Piston was not an official employee of 
the Times, but he nonetheless showed up every Friday to collect his $50 in cash. No 
checks. For this fee he sometimes swept the floors and occasionally rearranged the dirt on 
the front windows, and he hauled out the trash when someone complained. He kept no 
hours, came and went as he pleased, didn’t believe in knocking on doors when meetings 
were in progress, liked to use our phones and drink our coffee, and though he at first 
looked rather sinister eyes wide apart and covered with thick glasses, oversized trucker’s 
cap pulled down low, scraggly beard, hideous buck teeth—he was harmless. He provided 
his janitorial services for several businesses around the square, and somehow survived. 
No one knew where he lived, or with whom, or how he got about town. The less we knew 
about Piston, the better. 

Piston was in early Thursday morning—he’d had a key for decades—and said that he 
first heard something ticking. Upon closer examination he noticed three, five-gallon 
plastic cans laced together with a wooden box sitting on the floor next to them. The 
ticking sound came from the box. Piston had been around the printing room for many 
years and occasionally helped Hardy on Tuesday nights when he ran the paper. 

For most folks, panic would quickly follow curiosity, but for Piston it took a while. After 
poking around the cans to make sure that they were in fact filled with gasoline, and after 
determining that a series of dangerous-looking wires tied everything together, he walked 
to Margaret’s office and called Hardy. He said the ticking was getting louder. 

Hardy called the police, and around 9 A.M. I was awakened with the news. 

Most of downtown was evacuated by the time I arrived. Piston was sitting on the hood of 
a car, by then thoroughly distraught at having survived such a close call. He was being 


attended by some acquaintances and an ambulance driver, and he seemed to be enjoying 
the attention. 

Wiley Meek had photographed the bomb before the police removed the gasoline cans and 
placed them safely in the alley behind our building. “Woulda blown up half of 
downtown,” was Wiley’s uneducated evaluation of the bomb. He nervously darted 
around the scene, recording the excitement for future use. 

The chief of police explained to me that the area was off limits because the wooden box 
had not been opened and whatever was in there was still ticking. “It might explode,” he 
said gravely, as if he was the first one smart enough to realize the danger. I doubted if he 
had much experience with bombs, but I went along. An official from the state crime lab 
was being rushed in. It was decided that the four buildings in our row would remain 
unoccupied until this expert finished his business. 

A bomb in downtown Clanton! The news spread faster than the fire would have, and all 
work stopped. The county offices emptied, as well as the banks and stores and cafes, and 
before long large groups of spectators were crowded across the street, under the huge 
oaks on the south side of the courthouse, a safe distance away. They gawked at our little 
building, obviously concerned and frightened but also waiting for some excitement. 
They’d never seen a bomb blast before. 

The Clanton city police had been joined by the Sheriff’s deputies, and every uniform in 
the county was soon present, milling about on the sidewalks, doing absolutely nothing. 
Sheriff Coley and the police chief huddled and conferred and watched the throng across 
the street, then barked some orders here and there, but if any of their orders were 
followed it wasn’t noticeable. It was obvious to all that the city and county had no bomb 
drills. 

Baggy needed a drink. It was too early for me. I followed him into the rear of the 
courthouse, up a narrow flight of stairs I’d not seen before, through a cramped hallway, 
then up another twenty steps to a small dirty room with a low ceiling. “Used to be the old 
jury room,” he said. “Then it was the law library.” 

“What is it now?” I asked, almost afraid of the answer. 

“The Bar Room. Get it? Bar? Lawyers? Booze?” 

“Got it.” There was a card table with folding legs and a beaten look that indicated years 
of use. Around it were half a dozen mismatched chairs, all county hand-me-downs that 
had been passed from one county office to another and finally ditched in this dingy little 
room. 

In one corner there was a small refrigerator with a padlock. Baggy, of course, had a key, 
and inside he found a bottle of bourbon. He poured a generous shot into a paper cup and 


said, “Grab a chair.” We pulled two of them up to the window, and below was the scene 
we had just left. “Not a bad view, huh?” he said proudly. 

“How often you come here?”
“Twice a week, maybe, sometimes more. We play poker every Tuesday and Thursday at
noon.”


“Who’s in the club?”
“It’s a secret society.” He took a sip and smacked his lips as if he’d been in the desert for


a month. A spider made its way down a thick web along the window. Dust was half an
inch thick on the sills.
“I guess they’re losin’ their touch,” he said, gazing down at the excitement.
“They?” I was almost afraid to ask.
“The Padgitts.” He said this with a certain smugness, then allowed it to hang in the air for


my benefit.
“You’re sure it’s the Padgitts?” I asked.
Baggy thought he knew everything, and he was right about half the time. He smirked and


grunted, took another sip, then said, “They’ve been burnin’ buildings forever. It’s one of 
their scams—insurance fraud. They’ve made a bloody fortune off insurance companies.” 
A quick sip. “Odd, though, that they would use gasoline. Your more talented arsonists 
stay away from gasoline because it’s easily detected. You know that?” 

“No.”
“True. A good fire marshal can smell gasoline within minutes after the blaze is out.


Gasoline means arson. Arson means no insurance payoffs.” A sip. “Of course, in this case,
they probably wanted you to know it’s arson. Makes sense, doesn’t it?”
Nothing made sense at that moment. I was too confused to say much.
Baggy was content to do the talking. “Come to think of it, that’s probably the reason it


wasn’t detonated. They wanted you to see it. If it went off, then the county wouldn’t have
the Times, which might upset some folks. Might make some other folks happy.”
“Thanks.”
“Anyway, that explains it better. It was a subtle act of intimidation.”
“Subtle?”



“Yes, compared to what could’ve been. Believe me, those guys know how to burn 
buildings. You were lucky.” 

I noticed how he had quickly disassociated himself from the paper. It was “I” who was 
lucky, not “we.” 

The bourbon had found its way to the brain and was loosening the tongue. “About three 
years ago, maybe four, there was a large fire at one of their lumber mills, the one on 
Highway 401, just off the island. They never burn anything on the island because they 
don’t want the authorities snoopin’ around. Anyway, the insurance company smelled a rat, 
refused to pay, so Lucien Wilbanks filed this big lawsuit. It came to trial, in front of the 
Honorable Reed Loopus. I heard ever’ word of it.” A long, satisfying drink. 

“Who won?” 

He ignored me completely because the story was not yet properly laid out. “It was a big 
fire. The boys from Clanton took off with all their trucks. The volunteers from Karaway 
took off, ever’ yokel with a siren went screamin’ off toward Padgitt Island. Nothin’ like a 
good fire around here to get the boys worked up. That and a bomb, I guess, but I can’t 
remember the last bomb.” 

“And so…” 

“Highway 401 runs through some lowland near Padgitt Island, real swampy. There’s a 
bridge over Massey’s Creek, and when the fire trucks came flyin’ up to the bridge they 
found a pickup layin’ on its side, like it had rolled over. The road was completely blocked; 
couldn’t go around because there was nothin’ but swamps and ditches.” He smacked his 
lips and poured more from the bottle. It was time for me to say something, but whatever I 
said would be completely ignored anyway. This was the way Baggy preferred to be 
prompted. 

“Whose pickup was it?” I asked, the words barely out of my mouth before he was 
shaking his head as if the question was completely off the mark. 

“The fire was ragin’ like hell. Fire trucks backed up all along 401 because some clown 
had flipped his pickup. Never found him. No sign of a driver. No sign of an owner 
because there was no registration. No tags. The vehicle ID had been sanded off. The truck 
was never claimed. Wasn’t damaged much cither. All this came out at trial. Ever’body 
knew the Padgitts set the fire, flipped one of their stolen trucks to block the road, but the 
insurance company couldn’t prove it.” 

Down below Sheriff Coley had found his bullhorn. He was asking the people to please 
stay off the street in front of our office. His shrieking voice added urgency to the situation. 

“So the insurance company won?” I said, anxious to get to the end. 


“Helluva trial. Went on for three days. Wilbanks can usually cut a deal with one or two 
people on the jury. Been doin’ it for years and never gets caught. Plus he knows 
ever’body in the county. The insurance boys were up from Jackson, and they didn’t have 
a clue. The jury stayed out for two hours, came back with a verdict for the claim, a 
hundred grand, and for good measure, tacked on a million in punitive damages.” 

“One point one million!” I said. 

“You got it. The first million-dollar verdict in Ford County. Lasted about a year until the 
Supreme Court took an ax to it and cut out the punitive.” 

The notion of Lucien Wilbanks having such sway over jurors was not comforting. Baggy 
neglected his bourbon for a moment and gazed at something below. “This is a bad sign, 
son,” he finally said. “Really bad.” 

I was his boss and didn’t like to be referred to as “son,” but I let it slide. I had more 
pressing matters at hand. “The intimidation?” I said. 

“Yep. The Padgitts rarely leave the island. The fact that they’ve brought their little show 
on the road means they’re ready for war. If they can intimidate the newspaper, then 
they’ll try it with the jury. They already own the Sheriff.” 

“But Wilbanks said he wants a change of venue.” 

He snorted and rediscovered his drink. “Don’t bet on it, son.” 

“Please call me Willie.” Odd how I was now clinging to that name. 

“Don’t bet on it, Willie. The boy’s guilty; his only chance is to have a jury that can be 
bought or scared. Ten to one odds the trial takes place right here, in this building.” 

*** 

After two hours of waiting in vain for the ground to shake, the town was ready for lunch. 
The crowd broke up and drifted away. The expert from the state crime lab finally arrived 
and went to work in the printing room. I wasn’t allowed in the building, which was fine 
with me. 

Margaret, Wiley, and I had a sandwich in the gazebo on the courthouse lawn. We ate 
quietly, chatted briefly, the three of us keeping an eye on our office across the street. 


Occasionally someone would see us and stop for an awkward word or two. What do you 
say to bombing victims when the bomb doesn’t go off? Fortunately, the townsfolk had 
had little practice in that area. We collected some sympathy and a few offers of help. 

Sheriff Coley ambled over and gave a preliminary report on our bomb. The clock was of 
the wind-up alarm variety, available in stores everywhere. At first glance the expert 
thought there was a problem with the wiring. Very amateurish, he said. 

“How will you investigate this?” I asked with an edge.
“We’ll check for prints, see if we can find any witnesses. The usual.”
“Will you talk to the Padgitts?” I asked, even edgier. I was, after all, in the presence of


my employees. And though I was scared to death, I wanted to impress them with how
utterly fearless I was.
“You know somethin’ I don’t?” he shot back.
“They’re suspects, aren’t they?”


“Are you the Sheriff now?”
“They’re the most experienced arsonists in the county, been burning buildings for years
with impunity. Their lawyer threatened me in court last week. We’ve had Danny Padgitt
on the front page twice. If they’re not suspects, then who is?”


“Just go ahead and write the story, son. Call ‘em by name. You seem determined to get
sued anyway.”
“I’ll take care of the paper,” I said. “You catch the criminals.”


He tipped his hat to Margaret and walked away.
“Next year’s reelection year,” Wiley said as we watched Coley stop and chat with two
ladies near a drinking fountain. “I hope he has an opponent.”


***


The intimidation continued, at Wiley’s expense. He lived a mile from town on a five-acre
hobby farm, where his wife raised ducks and watermelons. That night as he parked in his
drive and was getting out of his car, two goons jumped from the shrubs and assaulted him.



The larger man knocked him down and kicked him in the face, while the other one 
rummaged through his backseat and pulled out two cameras. Wiley was fifty-eight years 
old and an ex-Marine, and at some point in the melee he managed to land a kick that sent 
the larger assailant to the ground. There they exchanged blows and as Wiley was gaining 
the upper hand the other thug banged him over the head with one of his cameras. Wiley 
said he didn’t remember much after that. 

His wife eventually heard the ruckus. She found Wiley on the ground, semiconscious, 
with both cameras shattered. In the house, she put ice packs on his face and determined 
that there were no broken bones. The ex-Marine did not want to go to the hospital. 

A deputy arrived and made a report. Wiley had caught only a glimpse of his attackers and 
he’d certainly never seen them before. “They’re back on the island by now,” he said. 
“You won’t find them.” 

His wife prevailed, and an hour later they called me from the hospital. I saw him between 
X rays. His face was a mess, but he managed to smile. He grabbed my hand and pulled 
me close. “Next week, front page,” he said through cut lips and swollen jaws. 

A few hours later I left the hospital and went for a long drive through the countryside. I 
kept glancing at my mirror, half-expecting another load of Padgitts to come roaring up, 
guns blazing. 

It was not a lawless county, where organized criminals ran roughshod over the lawabiding people. It was just the opposite—crime was rare. Corruption was generally 
frowned upon. I was right and they were wrong, and I decided I’d be damned before I 
knuckled under. I’d buy myself a gun; hell, everybody else in the county carried two or 
three. And if necessary I’d hire a guard of some sort. My paper would grow even bolder 
as the murder trial approached. 

Chapter 8 

Prior to the bankruptcy, and my unlikely rise in prominence in Ford County, I had heard a 
fascinating story about a local family. Spot never pursued it because it would’ve required 
some light research and a trip across the railroad tracks. 

Now that the paper was mine, I decided it was too good to pass up. 

Over in Lowtown, the colored section, there lived an extraordinary couple—Calia and 
Esau Ruffin. They had been married for over forty years and had raised eight children, 
seven of whom had earned PhD’s and were now college professors. Details on the 


remaining one were sketchy, though, according to Margaret, his name was Sam and he 
was hiding from the law. 

I called the house and Mrs. Ruffin answered the phone. I explained who I was and what I 
wanted, and she seemed to know everything about me. She said she’d been reading the 
Times for fifty years, front to back, everything including the obits and the want ads, and 
after a moment or two offered the opinion that the paper was in much better hands now. 
Longer stories. Fewer mistakes. More news. She spoke slowly, clearly, with precise 
diction I had not heard since I left Syracuse. 

When I finally had an opening, I thanked her and said I’d like to meet and talk about her 
remarkable family. She was flattered and insisted that I come over for lunch. 

Thus began an unusual friendship that opened my eyes to many things, not the least of 
which was Southern cuisine. 

*** 

My mother died when I was thirteen. She was anorexic, there were only four pallbearers. 
She weighed less than a hundred pounds and looked like a ghost. Anorexia was only one 
of her many problems. 

Because she did not eat, she did not cook. I cannot remember a single hot meal she 
prepared for me. Breakfast was a bowl of Cheerios, lunch a cold sandwich, dinner some 
frozen mess I usually ate in front of the television, alone. I was an only child and my 
father was never at home, which was a relief because his presence caused friction 
between them. He preferred to eat, she did not. They feuded over everything. 

I never went hungry; the pantry was always full of peanut butter and cereal and such. I 
occasionally ate with a friend and I always marveled at how real families cooked and 
spent so much time at the table. Food was simply not important around our house. 

As a teenager I existed on frozen dinners. At Syracuse it was beer and pizza. For the first 
twenty-three years of my life, I ate only when I was hungry. This was wrong, I soon 
learned in Clanton. In the South, eating has little to do with hunger. 

*** 


The Ruffin home was in a nicer section of Lowtown, in a row of neatly preserved and 
painted shotgun houses. The street addresses were on the mailboxes, and when I rolled to 
a stop I was smiling at the white picket fence and flowers—peonies and irises—that lined 
the sidewalk. It was early April, I had the top down on my Spitfire, and as I turned off the 
ignition I smelled something delicious. Pork chops! 

Calia Ruffin met me at the low swing-gate that opened into her immaculate front lawn. 
She was a stout woman, thick in the shoulders and trunk, with a handshake that was firm 
and felt like a man’s. She had gray hair and was showing the effects of raising so many 
children, but when she smiled, which was constantly, she lit up the world with two rows 
of brilliant, perfect teeth. I had never seen such teeth. 

“I’m so glad you came,” she said, halfway up the brick walkway. I was so glad too. It 
was about noon. Typically, I had yet to eat a bite, and the aromas wafting from the porch 
were making me dizzy. 

“A lovely house,” I said, gazing at the front of it. It was clapboard, painted a sparkling 
white, and gave the impression that someone was usually hanging around with a brush 
and bucket. A green tin-roofed porch ran across the entire front. 

“Why thank you. We’ve owned it for thirty years.” 

I knew that most of the dwellings in Lowtown were owned by white slumlords across the 
tracks. To own a home was an unusual accomplishment for blacks in 1970. 

“Who’s your gardener?” I asked as I stopped to smell a yellow rose. There were flowers 
everywhere—edging the walkway, along the porch, down both sides of their property line. 
“That would be me,” she said with a laugh, teeth gleaming in the sunlight. 

Up three steps and onto the porch, and there it was—the spread! A small table next to the 
railing was prepared for two people—white cotton cloth, white napkins, flowers in a 
small vase, a large pitcher of iced tea, and at least four covered dishes. 

“Who’s coming?” I asked. 

“Oh, just the two of us. Esau might drop by later.” 

“There’s enough food for an army.” I inhaled as deeply as possible and my stomach 
ached in anticipation. 

“Let’s eat now,” she said, “before it gets cold.” 

I restrained myself, walked casually to the table and pulled back a chair for her. She was 
delighted that I was such a gentleman. I sat across from her and was ready to yank off the 


lids and dive headfirst into whatever I found when she took both my hands and lowered 
her head. She began to pray. 

It would be a lengthy prayer. She thanked the Lord for everything good, including me, 
“her new friend.” She prayed for those who were sick and those who might become so. 
She prayed for rain and sun and health and humility and patience, and though I began to 
worry about the food getting cold I was mesmerized by her voice. Her cadence was slow, 
with thought given to each word. Her diction was perfect, every consonant treated 
equally, every comma and period honored. I had to peek to make sure I wasn’t dreaming. 
I had never heard such speech from a Southern black, or a Southern white for that matter. 

I peeked again. She was talking to her Lord, and her face was perfectly content. For a few 
seconds, I actually forgot about the food. She squeezed my hands as she petitioned the 
Almighty with eloquence that came only from years of practice. She quoted Scripture, the 
King James Version for sure, and it was a bit odd to hear her use words like “thou” and 
“thine” and “whither” and “goest.” But she knew precisely what she was doing. In the 
clutches of this very holy woman, I had never felt closer to God. 

I couldn’t imagine such a lengthy devotional over a table crowded with eight children. 
Something told me, though, that when Calia Ruffin prayed everybody got still. 

Finally, she ended with a flourish, a long burst in which she managed to appeal for the 
forgiveness of her sins, which I presumed were few and far between, and for my own, 
which, well, if she only knew. 

She released me and began removing lids from bowls. The first contained a pile of pork 
chops smothered in a sauce that included, among many ingredients, onions and peppers. 
More steam hit my face and I wanted to eat with my fingers. In the second there was a 
mound of yellow corn, sprinkled with green peppers, still hot from the stove. There was 
boiled okra, which, she explained as she prepared to serve, she preferred over the fried 
variety because she worried about too much grease in her diet. She was taught to batter 
and fry everything, from tomatoes to pickles, and she had come to realize that this was 
not altogether healthy. There were butter beans, likewise unbattered and unfried, but 
rather cooked with ham hocks and bacon. There was a platter of small red tomatoes 
covered with pepper and olive oil. She was one of the very few cooks in town who used 
olive oil, she said as she continued her narrative. I was hanging on every word as my 
large plate was being tended to. 

A son in Milwaukee shipped her good olive oil because such was unheard of in Clanton. 

She apologized because the tomatoes were store bought; hers were still on the vine and 
wouldn’t be ready until summertime. The corn, okra, and butter beans had been canned 
from her garden last August. In fact, the only real “fresh” vegetables were the collard 
greens, or “spring greens” as she called them. 


A large black skillet was hidden in the center of the table, and when she pulled the napkin 
off it there were at least four pounds of hot corn bread. She removed a huge wedge, 
placed it in the center of my plate, and said, “There. That will get you started.” I had 
never had so much food placed in front of me. The feast began. 

I tried to eat slowly, but it was impossible. I had arrived with an empty stomach, and 
somewhere in the midst of the competing aromas and the beauty of the table and the 
rather long-winded blessing and the careful description of each dish, I had become 
thoroughly famished. I packed it in, and she seemed content to do the talking. 

Her garden had produced most of the meal. She and Esau grew four types of tomatoes, 
butter beans, string beans, black-eyed peas, crowder peas, cucumbers, eggplant, squash, 
collards, mustard greens, turnips, vidalia onions, yellow onions, green onions, cabbage, 
okra, new red potatoes, russet potatoes, carrots, beets, corn, green peppers, cantaloupes, 
two varieties of watermelon, and a few other things she couldn’t recall at the moment. 
The pork chops were provided by her brother, who still lived on the old family place out 
in the country. He killed two hogs for them every winter and they stuffed their freezer. In 
return, they kept him in fresh vegetables. 

“We don’t use chemicals,” she said, watching me gorge myself. “Everything is natural.” 

It certainly tasted like it. 

“But it’s all put-up, you know, from the winter. It’ll taste better in the summertime when 
we pick and eat it just a few hours later. Will you come back then, Mr. Traynor?” 

I grunted and nodded and somehow managed to convey the message that I would return 
any time she wanted. 

“Would you like to see my garden?” she asked. 

I nodded again, both jaws filled to capacity. 

“Good. It’s out back. I’ll pick you some lettuce and greens. They’re coming in nicely.” 

“Wonderful,” I managed to utter. 

“I figure a single man like you needs all the help he can get.” 

“How’d you know I was single?” I took a gulp of tea. It could have served as dessert— 
there was so much sugar in it. 

“Folks are talking about you. Word gets around. There are not too many secrets in 
Clanton, on both sides of the tracks.” 

“What else have you heard?” 


“Let’s see. You rent from the Hocutts. You come from up North.”
“Memphis.”
“That far?”
“It’s an hour away.”
“Just joking. One of my daughters went to college there.”
I had many questions about her children, but I was not ready to take notes. Both hands


were busy eating. At some point I called her Miss Calia, instead of Miss Ruffin. 
“It’s Callie,” she said. “Miss Callie will do just fine.” One of the first habits I picked up 
in Clanton was referring to the ladies, regardless of age, by sticking the word “Miss” in 
front of their names. Miss Brown, Miss Webster, for new acquaintances who had a few 
years on them. Miss Martha, Miss Sara, for the younger ones. It was a sign of chivalry 

and good breeding, and since I had neither it was important to seize as many local
customs as possible.
“Where did Calia come from?” I asked.
“It’s Italian,” she said, as if that would explain everything. She ate some butter beans. I


carved up a pork chop. Then I said, “Italian?”


“Yes, that was my first language. It’s a long story, one of many. Did they really try to
burn clown the paper?”
“Yes, they did,” I said, wondering if I’d heard this black lady in rural Mississippi just say


that her first language was Italian.
“And they assaulted Mr. Meek?”
“They did.”
“Who is they?”
“We don’t know yet. Sheriff Coley is investigating.” I was anxious to get her impression


of our Sheriff. While I waited, I went after another wedge of corn bread. Soon there was 
butter dripping from my chin. 

“He’s been the Sheriff for a long time, hasn’t he?” she said.
I’m sure she knew the exact year in which Mackey Don Coley had first bought himself
into office. “What do you think of him?” I asked.



She drank some tea and contemplated. Miss Callie did not rush her answers, especially 
when talking about others. “On this side of the tracks, a good Sheriff is one who keeps 
the gamblers and the bootleggers and the whoremongers away from the rest of us. In that 
regard, Mr. Coley has done a proper job.” 

“Can I ask you something?” 

“Certainly. You’re a reporter.” 

“Your speech is unusually articulate and precise. How much education did you receive?” 
It was a sensitive question in a society where, for many decades, education had not been 
stressed. It was 1970, and Mississippi still had no public kindergartens and no mandatory 
school attendance laws. 

She laughed, giving me the full benefit of those teeth. “I finished the ninth grade, Mr. 
Traynor.” 

“The ninth grade?” 

“Yes, but my situation was unusual. I had a wonderful tutor. It’s another long story.” 

I began to realize that these wonderful stories Miss Callie was promising would take 
months, maybe years to develop. Perhaps they would evolve on the porch, over a weekly 
banquet. 

“Let’s save it for later,” she said. “How is Mr. Caudle?” 

“Not well. He will not come out of his house.” 

“A fine man. He will always be close to the heart of the black community. He had such 
courage.” 

I thought Spot’s “courage” had more to do with widening the range of his obituaries than 
with a commitment to the fair treatment of all. But I had learned how important dying 
was to black folks—the ritual of the wake, often lasting a week; the marathon memorial 
services, with open caskets and much wailing; the mile-long funeral processions; and, 
lastly, the final graveside farewells fraught with emotion. When Spot had so radically 
opened his obituary page to blacks he had become a hero in Lowtown. 

“A fine man,” I said, reaching for my third pork chop. I was beginning to ache a bit, but 
there was so much food left on the table! 

“You’re doing him proud with your obituaries,” she said with a warm smile. 

“Thank you. I’m still learning.” 


“You have courage too, Mr. Traynor.”
“Could you call me Willie? I’m only twenty-three.”
“I prefer Mr. Traynor.” And that issue was settled. It would take four years before she


could break down and use my first name. “You have no fear of the Padgitt family,” she
announced.
That was news to me. “It’s just part of my job,” I said.


“Do you expect the intimidation to continue?”
“Probably so. They are accustomed to getting whatever they want. They are violent,
ruthless people, but a free press must endure.” Who was I kidding? One more bomb or
assault and I’d be back in Memphis before sunrise.


She stopped eating and her eyes turned toward the street, where she looked at nothing in
particular. She was deep in thought. I, of course, kept stuffing my face.


Finally, she said, “Those poor little children. Seeing their mother like that.”
That image finally caused my fork to stop. I wiped my mouth, took a long breath, and let
the food settle for a moment. The horror of the crime was left to everyone’s imagination,
and for days Clanton had whispered about little else. As always happens, the whispers
and rumors got amplified, different versions were spun off and repeated, and enlarged yet
again. I was curious as to how the stories were playing in Lowtown.


“You told me on the phone you’ve been reading the Times for fifty years,” I said, almost
belching.
“Indeed I have.”


“Can you remember a more brutal crime?”
She paused for a second as she reviewed five decades, then slowly shook her head. “No, I
cannot.”


“Have you ever met a Padgitt?”


“No. They stay on the island, and always have. Even their Negroes stay out there, making
whiskey, doing their voodoo, all sorts of foolishness.”
“Voodoo?”



“Yes, it’s common knowledge on this side of the tracks. Nobody here messes with the 
Padgitt Negroes, never have.” 

“Do people on this side of the tracks believe Danny Padgitt raped and killed her?” 

“The ones who read your newspaper certainly do.” 

That stung more than she would ever know. “We just report the facts,” I said smugly. 
“The boy was arrested. He’s been charged. He’s in jail awaiting trial.” 

“Isn’t there a presumption of innocence?” 

Another squirm on my side of the table. “Of course.” 

“Do you think it was fair to use a photograph of him handcuffed, with blood on his 
shirt?” I was struck by her sense of fairness. Why would she, or any other black in Ford 
County, care if Danny Padgitt was treated fairly? Few people had ever worried about 
black defendants getting decent treatment by the police or the press. 

“He had blood on his shirt when he arrived at the jail. We didn’t put it there.” Neither one 
of us was enjoying this little debate. I took a sip of tea and found it difficult to swallow. I 
was stuffed all the way down. 

She looked at me with one of those smiles and had the nerve to say, “What about some 
dessert? I baked a banana pudding.” 

I could not say no. Nor could I hold another bite. A compromise was called for. “Let’s 
wait a while, give things a chance to settle.” 

“Then have some more tea,” she said, already refilling my glass. Breathing was difficult, 
so I reclined as much as possible in my chair and decided to act like a journalist. Miss 
Callie, who’d eaten far less than I, was finishing a serving of okra. 

According to Baggy, Sam Ruffin had been the first black student to enroll in the white 
schools in Clanton. It happened in 1964 when Sam was a seventh grader, age twelve, and 
the experience had been difficult for everyone. Especially Sam. Baggy warned me that 
Miss Callie might not talk about her youngest child. There was a warrant for his arrest 
and he had fled the area. 

She was reluctant at first. In 1963, the courts ruled that a white school district could not 
deny admission to a black student. Forced integration was still years in the future. Sam 
was her youngest, and when she and Esau made the decision to take him to the white 
school they hoped they would be joined by other black families. They were not, and for 
two years Sam was the only black student at Clanton Junior High School. He was 
tormented and beaten, but he quickly learned to handle his fists and with time was left 
alone. He begged his parents to take him back to the Negro school, but they held their 


ground, even after he moved to the senior high. Relief was coming, they kept telling 
themselves. The desegregation fight was raging across the South and blacks were 
continually promised that the mandate of Brown versus Board of Education would be 
carried out. 

“It is hard to believe that it is now 1970, and the schools here are still segregated,” she 
said. Federal lawsuits and appellate decisions were pummeling white resistance 
throughout the South, but, typically, Mississippi was fighting to the bitter end. Most 
white folks I knew in Clanton were convinced that their schools would never be 
integrated. I, a Northerner from Memphis, could see the obvious. 

“Do you regret sending Sam to the white school?” 

“Yes and no. Someone had to be courageous. It was painful knowing he was very 
unhappy, but we had taken a stand. We were not going to retreat.” 

“How is he today?” 

“Sam is another story, Mr. Traynor, one I might talk about later, or not. Would you like 
to see my garden?” 

It was more of a command than an invitation. I followed her through the house, down a 
narrow hallway lined with dozens of framed photographs of children and grandchildren. 
The inside was as meticulous as the outside. The kitchen opened to the back porch and 
from there the Garden of Eden stretched to the rear fence. Not a single square foot was 
wasted. 

It was a postcard of beautiful colors, neat rows of plants and vines, narrow dirt footpaths 
so that Callie and Esau could tend to their spectacular bounty. 

“What do you do with all this food?” I asked in amazement. 

“We eat some, sell a little, give most away. No one goes hungry around here.” At that 
moment my stomach was aching like never before. Hunger was a notion I couldn’t 
comprehend. I followed her into the garden, moving slowly along the footpaths as she 
pointed out the herb patch and melons and all the other delicious fruits and vegetables she 
and Esau tended to with great care. She commented on every plant, including an 
occasional weed, which she snatched almost with anger and flung back into some vines. 
It was impossible for her to walk through the garden and ignore the details. She looked 
for insects, killed a nasty green worm on a tomato vine, searched for weeds, made mental 
notes about future chores for Esau. The leisurely stroll was doing wonders for my 
digestive system. 

So this is where food comes from, I thought to my ignorant self. What did I expect? I was 
a city kid. I’d never been in a vegetable garden before. I had many questions, all banal, so 
I held my tongue. 


She examined a stalk of corn and was not pleased with whatever she saw. She tore off a 
snap bean, broke it in two, analyzed it like a scientist, and offered the guarded opinion 
that they needed much more sun. She saw a patch of weeds and informed me Esau would 
be sent to pull them as soon as he got home. I did not envy Esau. 

*** 

After three hours, I left the Ruffin home stuffed yet again with banana pudding. I also left 
with a sack of “spring greens,” which I had no idea what to do with, and precious few 
notes on which to write a story. I also had an invitation to return the following Thursday 
for another lunch. Lastly, I had Miss Callie’s handwritten list of all the errors she’d found 
in that week’s edition of the Times. Almost all were typographical errors and misspelled 
words—twelve in all. Under Spot, the average had been about twenty. Now it was down 
to around ten. It was a lifelong habit of hers. “Some folks like crossword puzzles,” she 
said. “I like to look for mistakes.” 

It was hard not to take this personally. She certainly didn’t intend to criticize anyone. I 
vowed to proofread the copy with much more enthusiasm. 

I also left with the feeling that I had entered a new and rewarding friendship. 

Chapter 9 

We ran another large photo on the front page. It was Wiley’s shot of the bomb before the 
police dismantled it. The headline above it screamed: 

Bomb Planted in Times Office 

My story began with Piston and his unlikely discovery. It included every detail I could 
substantiate, and a few I could not. No comment from the chief of police, a few 
meaningless sentences from Sheriff Coley. It ended with a summary of the findings by 


the state crime lab, and a prediction that, if detonated, the bomb would have caused 
“massive” damage to the buildings on the south side of the square. 

Wiley would not allow me to use a photo of his badly bruised face, though I pleaded 
desperately with him to do so. On the bottom half of the front page I ran the headline, 

Times Photographer Assaulted at Home 

Again, my story spared no detail, though Wiley insisted he be allowed to edit it. 

In both stories, and with no effort at being subtle, I linked the crimes and implied rather 
strongly that little was being done by the authorities, especially Sheriff Coley, to prevent 
further intimidation. I never named the Padgitts. I didn’t have to. Everyone in the county 
knew they were bullying me and my newspaper. 

Spot had been too lazy for editorials. He’d written only one during my stint as an 
employee. A congressman from Oregon had filed some nutty bill that would somehow 
affect the cutting of redwood trees—more cutting or maybe less, it really wasn’t clear. 
This had upset Spot. For two weeks he labored over an editorial and finally ran a twothousand-word tirade. It was obvious to anyone with a high school education that he 
wrote with a pen in one hand and a dictionary in the other. The first paragraph was filled 
with more six-syllable words than anyone had ever seen and was virtually unreadable. 
Spot was shocked when there was no response from the community. He expected a flood 
of sympathetic letters. Few of his readers could have survived the flood from Webster’s. 

Finally, three weeks later, a hand-scrawled note was slid under the front door of the 
office. It read: 

Dear Editor: 

I’m sorry you’re so worked up over the redwoods, which we don’t have in Mississippi. If 
Congress starts messing with pulpwood, would you please let us know? 

It was unsigned, but Spot ran it anyway. He was relieved that someone out there was 
paying attention. Baggy told me later that the note was written by one of his drinking 
buddies in the courthouse. 


My editorial began, “A free and uninhibited press is crucial to sound democratic 
government.” Without being windy or preachy, I went on for four paragraphs extolling 
the importance of an energetic and inquisitive newspaper, not only for the country but for 
every small community as well. I vowed that the Times would not be frightened away 
from reporting local crimes, whether they were rapes and murders or corrupt acts by 
public officials. 

It was bold, gutsy, and downright brilliant. The townsfolk were on my side. It was, after 
all, the Times versus the Padgitts and their Sheriff. We were taking a mighty stand 
against bad people, and though they were dangerous they were evidently not intimidating 
me. I kept telling myself to act brave, and I really had no choice. What was my paper 
supposed to do ignore the Kassellaw murder? Take it easy on Danny Padgitt? 

My staff was elated with the editorial. Margaret said it made her proud to work for the 
Times. Wiley, still nursing his wounds, was now carrying a gun and looking for a fight. 
“Give ‘em hell, rookie,” he said. 

Only Baggy was skeptical. “You’re gonna get yourself hurt,” he said. 

And Miss Callie once again described me as courageous. Lunch the following Thursday 
lasted for only two hours and included Esau. I actually began taking notes about her 
family. More important, she’d found only three errors in that week’s edition. 

*** 

I was alone in my office early Friday afternoon when someone made a noisy entrance 
downstairs, then came clamoring up. He shoved my door open without so much as a 
“Hello” and stuck both hands in his pants pockets. He looked vaguely familiar; we’d met 
somewhere around the square. 

“You got one of these, boy?” he growled, yanking his right hand out and momentarily 
freezing my heart and lungs. He slid a shiny pistol across my desk as if it were a set of 
keys. It spun wildly for a few seconds before resting directly before me, the barrel 
mercifully pointing toward the windows. 

He lunged across the desk, thrust out a massive hand, and said, “Harry Rex Vonner, a 
pleasure.” I was too stunned to speak or move, but eventually honored him with an 
embarrassingly weak handshake. I was still watching the gun. 

“It’s a Smith and Wesson thirty-eight, six-shooter, damned fine firearm. You carry one?” 


I shook my head no. The name alone sent chills to my feet. 

Harry Rex kept a nasty black cigar tucked into the left side of his mouth. It gave the 
impression of having spent most of the day there, slowly disintegrating like a plug of 
chewing tobacco. No smoke because it wasn’t lit. He dropped his massive body into a 
leather chair as if he might stay for a couple of hours. 

“You a crazy sumbitch, you know that?” He didn’t speak as much as he growled. Then I 
caught the name. He was a local lawyer, once described by Baggy as the meanest divorce 
attorney in the county. He had a large fleshy face with short hair that shot in all directions 
like windblown straw. His ancient khaki suit was wrinkled and stained and said to the 
world that Harry Rex didn’t give a damn about anything. 

“What am I supposed to do with this?” I asked, pointing at the gun. 

“First you load it, I’ll give you some bullets, then you stick it in your pocket and carry it 
with you everywhere you go, and when one of them Padgitt thugs jumps out from behind 
the bushes you blast him right between the eyes.” To help convey his message, he moved 
his index finger through the air like a bullet and poked himself between the eyes. 

“It’s not loaded?” 

“Hell no. Don’t you know anything about guns?” 

“Afraid not.” 

“Well, you’d better learn, boy, at the rate you’re goin’.” 

“That bad, huh?” 

“I did a divorce one time, ten years ago I guess, for a man whose young wife liked to 
sneak over to the brothel and make a few bucks. The guy worked offshore, stayed gone 
all the time, had no idea what she was up to. He finally found out. The Padgitts owned 
the whorehouse and one of them had taken a shine to the young lady.” Somehow the 
cigar stayed in place, bobbing up and down with the narrative. “My client was 
heartbroken and he wanted blood. He got it. They caught him out one night and beat him 
senseless.” 

“They?” 

“The Padgitts I’m sure, or some of their operatives.” 

“Operatives?” 

“Yeah, they got all sorts of thugs who work for them. Leg breakers, bomb throwers, car 
stealers, hit men.” 


He allowed the “hit men” to hang in the air while he watched me flinch. He gave the 
impression of one who could tell stories forever without being unduly burdened by 
veracity. Harry Rex had a nasty grin and a twinkle in his eyes, and I strongly suspected 
some embellishment was under way. 

“And of course they were never caught,” I said. 

“Padgitts never get caught.” 

“What happened to your client?” 

“He spent a few months in the hospital. The brain damage was pretty severe. In and out 
of institutions, really sad. Broke his family. He drifted to the Gulf Coast where they 
elected him to the state senate.” 

I smiled and nodded at what I hoped was a lie, but I didn’t pursue it. Without touching 
the cigar with his hands, he flicked his tongue somehow and cocked his head, and it slid 
to the right side of his mouth. 

“You ever eat goat?” he asked. 

“Say what?” 

“Goat?” 

“No. I didn’t know it was edible.” 

“We’re roastin’ one this afternoon. The first Friday of each month I throw a goat party at 
my cabin in the woods. Some music, cold beer, fun and games, about fifty folks, all 
carefully selected by me, the cream of society. No doctors, no bankers, no country club 
assholes. A classy bunch. Why don’t you stop by? I got a firin’ range out behind the pond. 
I’ll take the pistol and we’ll figure out how to use the damned thing.” 

*** 

Harry Rex’s ten-minute drive into the country took almost half an hour, and that was on 
the paved county road. When I crossed the “third creek past Heck’s old Union 76 
station,” I left the asphalt and turned onto gravel. For a while it was a nice gravel road 
with mailboxes indicating some hope of civilization, but after three miles the mail route 
stopped and so did the gravel. When I saw a “rusted-out Massey Ferguson tractor with no 


tires,” I turned left onto a dirt road. His crude map referred to it as a pig trail, though I 
had never seen one of those. After the pig trail disappeared into a dense forest, I gave 
serious thought to turning back@. 

My Spitfire wasn’t designed for the terrain. By the time I saw the roof of his cabin, I’d 
been driving for forty-five minutes. 

There was a barbed-wire fence with an open metal gate, and I stopped there because the 
young man with the shotgun wanted me to. He kept it on his shoulder as he looked 
scornfully at my car. “What kind is it?” he grunted. 

“Triumph Spitfire. It’s British.” I was smiling, trying not to offend him. Why did a goat 
party need armed security? He had the rustic look of someone who’d never seen a car 
made in another country. 

“What’s your name?” he asked. 

“Willie Traynor.” 

I think the “Willie” made him feel better, so he nodded at the gate. “Nice car,” he said as 
I drove through. 

The pickup trucks outnumbered the cars. Parking was haphazard in a field in front of the 
cabin. Merle Haggard was wailing from two speakers placed in the windows. One group 
of guests huddled over a pit where smoke was rising and the goat was roasting. Another 
group was tossing horseshoes beside the cabin. Three well-dressed ladies were on the 
porch, sipping something that was certainly not beer. Harry Rex appeared and greeted me 
warmly. 

“Who’s the boy with the shotgun?” I asked. 

“Oh him. That’s Duffy, my first wife’s nephew.” 

“Why is he out there?” If the goat party included something illegal, I at least wanted 
some notice. 

“Don’t worry. Duffy ain’t all there, and the gun ain’t loaded. He’s been guardin’ nothin’ 
for years.” 

I smiled as if this made perfect sense. He guided me to the pit where I saw my first goat, 
dead or alive. With the exception of head and hide, it appeared to be intact. I was 
introduced to the many chefs. With each name I got an occupation—a lawyer, a bail 
bondsman, a car dealer, a farmer. As I watched the goat spin slowly on a spit, I soon 
learned that there were many competing theories on how to properly barbecue one. Harry 
Rex handed me a beer and we moved on to the cabin, speaking to anyone we bumped 


into. A secretary, a “crooked real estate agent,” the current wife of Harry Rex. Each 
seemed pleased to meet the new owner of the Times. 

The cabin sat on the edge of a muddy pond, the kind snakes find attractive. A deck 
protruded over the water, and there we worked the crowd. Harry Rex took great delight in 
introducing me to his friends. “He’s a good boy, not your typical Ivy League asshole,” he 
said more than once. I didn’t like to be referred to as a “boy,” but then I was getting used 
to it. 

I settled into a small group that included two ladies who looked as though they’d spent 
years in the local honky-tonks. Heavy eye makeup, teased hair, tight clothing, and they 
immediately took an interest in me. The conversation began with the bomb and the 
assault on Wiley Meek and the prevailing cloud of fear the Padgitts had spread over the 
county. I acted as if it was just another routine episode in my long and colorful career in 
journalism. They drilled me with questions and I did more talking than I wanted to. 

Harry Rex rejoined us and handed me a suspicious-looking jar of clear liquid. “Sip it 
slowly,” he said, much like a father. 

“What is it?” I asked. I noticed that others were watching. 

“Peach brandy.” 

“Why is it in a fruit jar?” I asked. 

“That’s the way they make it,” he said. 

“It’s moonshine,” one of the painted ladies said. The voice of experience. 

Not often would these rural folks see an “Ivy Leaguer” take his first drink of moonshine, 
so the crowd drew closer. I was certain I had consumed more alcohol in the prior five 
years at Syracuse than anyone else present, so I threw caution to the wind. I lifted the jar, 
said, “Cheers,” and took a very small sip. I smacked my lips, said, “Not bad.” And tried 
to smile like a freshman at a fraternity party. 

The burning began at the lips, the point of initial contact, and spread rapidly across the 
tongue and gums and by the time it hit the back of my throat I thought I was on fire. 
Everyone was watching. Harry Rex took a sip from his jar. 

“Where does it come from?” I asked, as nonchalantly as possible, flames escaping 
through my teeth. 

“Not far from here,” someone said. 

Scorched and numb, I took another sip, quite anxious for the crowd to ignore me for a 
while. Oddly enough, the third sip revealed a hint of peach flavoring, as if the taste buds 


had to be shocked before they could work. When it was apparent that I was not going to 
breathe fire, vomit, or scream, the conversation resumed. Harry Rex, ever anxious to 
speed along my education, thrust forward a plate of fried something. “Have one of these,” 
he said. 

“What is it?” I asked, suspicious. 

Both of my painted ladies curled up their noses and turned away, as if the smell might 
make them ill. “Chitlins,” one of them said. 

“What’s that?” 

Harry Rex popped one in his mouth to prove they weren’t poison, then shoved the plate 
closer to me. “Go ahead,” he said, chomping away at this delicacy. 

Folks were watching again, so I picked out the smallest piece and put it in my mouth. The 
texture was rubbery, the taste was acrid and foul. The smell had a barnyard essence. I 
chewed as hard as possible, choked it down, then followed with a gulp of moonshine. 
And for a few seconds I thought I might faint. 

“Hog guts, boy,” Harry Rex said, slapping me on the back. He threw another one in his 
large mouth and offered me the plate. “Where’s the goat?” I managed to ask. Anything 
would be an improvement. 

Whatever happened to beer and pizza? Why would these people eat and drink such 
disagreeable things? 

Harry Rex walked away, the putrid smell of the chitlins following him like smoke. I 
placed the fruit jar on the railing, hoping it would tumble and disappear. I watched others 
pass around their moonshine, one jar usually good for an entire group. There was 
absolutely no concern over germs and such. No bacteria could’ve survived within three 
feet of the vile brew. 

I excused myself from the deck, said I needed to find a restroom. Harry Rex emerged 
from the back door of the cabin holding two pistols and a box of ammo. “We’d better 
take a few shots before it gets dark,” he said. “Follow me.” 

We stopped at the goat spit where a cowboy named Rafe joined us. “Rafe’s my runner,” 
Harry Rex said as the three of us headed for the woods. 

“What’s a runner?” I asked. 

“Runs cases.” 

“I’m the ambulance chaser,” Rafe said helpfully. “Although usually the ambulance is 
behind me.” 


I had so much to learn, though I was making some real progress. Chitlins and moonshine 
in one day were no small feat. We walked a hundred yards or so down an old field road, 
through some woods, then came to a clearing. Between two magnificent oaks Harry Rex 
had constructed a semicircle wall of hay bales twenty feet high. In the center was a white 
bedsheet, and in the middle of it was the crude outline of a man. An attacker. The enemy. 
The target. 

Not surprisingly, Rafe whipped out his own handgun. Harry Rex was handling mine. 
“Here’s the deal,” he said, beginning the lesson. “This is a double action revolver with six 
cartridges. Press here and the cylinder pops out.” Rafe reached over and deftly loaded six 
bullets, something he had obviously done many, many times. “Snap it back like this, and 
you’re ready to fire.” 

We were about fifty feet from the target. I could still hear the music from the cabin. What 
would the other guests think when they heard gunfire? Nothing. It happened all the time. 

Rafe took my handgun and faced the target. “For starters, spread your legs to shoulders’ 
width, bend the knees slightly, use both hands like this, and squeeze the trigger with your 
right index finger.” He demonstrated as he spoke, and, of course, everything looked easy. 
I was standing less than five feet away when the gun fired, and the sharp crack jolted my 
nerves. Why did it have to be so loud? 

I had never heard live gunfire. 

The second shot hit the target square in the chest, and the next four landed around the 
midsection. He turned to me, opened the cylinder, spun out the empty cartridges, and said, 
“Now you do it.” 

My hands were shaking as I took the gun. It was warm and the smell of gunpowder hung 
heavy around us. I managed to shove in the six cartridges and snap the cylinder shut 
without hurting anyone. I faced the target, lifted the gun with both hands, crouched like 
someone in a bad movie, closed my eyes and pulled the trigger. It felt and sounded like a 
small bomb of some sort. 

“You gotta keep your eyes open, dammit,” Harry Rex growled. 

“What did I hit?” 

“That hill beyond the oak trees.” 

“Try it again,” Rafe said. 

I tried to look down the gunsight but it was shaking too badly to be of any use. I squeezed 
the trigger again, this time with my eyes open, waiting to see where my bullet hit. I 
noticed no entry wound anywhere near the target. 


“He missed the sheet,” Rafe mumbled behind me. 

“Fire again,” Harry Rex said. 

I did, and again couldn’t see where the bullet landed. Rafe gently took my left arm and 
eased me forward another ten feet. “You’re doin’ fine,” he said. “We got plenty of 
ammo.” 

I missed the hay on the fourth shot, and Harry Rex said, “I guess the Padgitts are safe 
after all.” 

“It’s the moonshine,” I said. 

“It just takes practice,” Rafe said, moving me forward yet again. My hands were sweating, 
my heart was galloping away, my ears were ringing. 

On number five I hit the sheet, barely, in the top right-hand corner, at least six feet from 
the target. On number six I missed everything again and heard the bullet hit a branch up 
in one of the oaks. 

“Nice shot,” Harry Rex said. “You almost hit a squirrel.” 

“Shut up,” I said. 

“Relax,” Rafe said. “You’re too tense.” He helped me reload, and this time he squeezed 
my hands around the gun. “Breathe deeply,” he said over my shoulder. “Exhale right 
before you pull the trigger.” He steadied the gun as I looked down the sight, and when it 
fired the target took a hit in the groin. 

“Now we’re in business,” Harry Rex said. 

Rafe released me, and, like a gunslinger at high noon, I unloaded the next five shots. All 
hit the sheet, one would’ve taken off the target’s ear. Rafe approved and we loaded up 
again. 

Harry Rex had a 9-millimeter Glock automatic from his vast collection, and as the sun 
slowly disappeared we took turns blasting away. He was good and had no trouble drilling 
ten straight shots into the upper torso from fifty feet. After four rounds, I began to relax 
and enjoy the sport of it. Rafe was an excellent teacher, and as I progressed he passed on 
tips here and there. “It just takes practice,” he kept saying. 

When we finished, Harry Rex said, “The gun’s a gift. You can come out here anytime for 
target practice.” 


“Thanks,” I said. I stuck the gun in my pocket like a real redneck. I was delighted that the 
ritual was over, that I had accomplished something that every other male in the county 
had experienced by his twelfth birthday. I didn’t feel any safer. Any Padgitt who jumped 
from the bushes would have the advantage of surprise, and the benefit of years of target 
practice. I could almost envision myself grappling with my own gun in the darkness and 
finally unloading a bullet that would more likely hit me than any assailant. 

As we were walking back through the woods, Harry Rex said from behind me, “That
bleached blonde you met, Carleen.”
“Yeah,” I said, suddenly nervous.
“She likes you.”
Carleen had lived at least forty very hard years. I could think of nothing to say.


“She’s always good for a hop in the sack.”
I doubted if Carleen had missed too many sacks in Ford County. “No thanks,” I said. “I
got a girl in Memphis.”


“So?”
“Good call,” Rafe said under his breath.
“A girl here, a girl there. What’s the big difference?”
“I gotta deal for you, Harry Rex,” I said. “If I need your help picking up women, I’ll let


you know.”
“Just a roll in the hay,” he mumbled.
I did not have a girl in Memphis, but I knew several. I’d rather make the drive than stoop


to the likes of Carleen.


***


The goat had a distinctive taste; not good, but, after the chitlins, not nearly as bad as I had 
feared. It was tough and smothered in sticky barbeque sauce, which, I suspected, was 
applied in generous layers to counter the taste of the meat. I toyed with a slice of it and 
washed it down with beer. We were on the deck again with Loretta Lynn in the 


background. The moonshine had made the rounds for a while and some of the guests 
were dancing above the pond. Carleen had disappeared earlier with someone else, so I 
felt safe. Harry Rex sat nearby, telling everyone how effective I’d been shooting squirrels 
and rabbits. His talent for storytelling was remarkable. 

I was an oddity but every effort was made to include me. Driving the dark roads home, I 
asked myself the same question I posed every day. What was I doing in Ford County, 
Mississippi? 

Chapter 10 

The gun was too big for my pocket. For a few hours I tried walking around with it, but I 
was terrified the thing would discharge down there very near my privates. So I decided to 
carry it in a ragged leather briefcase my father had given me. For three days the briefcase 
went everywhere, even to lunch, then I grew weary of that too. After a week I left the 
pistol under the seat of my car, and after three weeks I had pretty much forgotten about it. 
I did not go to the cabin for more target practice, though I did attend a few other goat 
parties in which I avoided chitlins, moonshine, and an increasingly aggressive Carleen. 

The county was quiet, a lull before the frenzy of the trial. The Times said nothing about 
the case because nothing was happening. The Padgitts were still refusing to pledge their 
land for Danny’s bail, so he remained a guest in Sheriff Coley’s special cell, watching 
television, playing cards or checkers, getting plenty of rest, and eating better food than 
the common inmates. 

The first week in May, Judge Loopus was back in town, and my thoughts returned to my 
trusty Smith & Wesson. 

Lucien Wilbanks had filed a motion requesting a change of venue, and the Judge set it for 
a hearing at 9 A.M. on a Monday morning. Half the county was there, it seemed. 
Certainly most of the regulars from around the square. Baggy and I got to the courtroom 
early and secured good seats. 

The defendant’s presence was not required, but evidently Sheriff Coley wanted to show 
him off. They brought him in, handcuffed and wearing new orange coveralls. Everyone 
looked at me. The power of the press had brought about change. 

“It’s a setup,” Baggy whispered. 

“What?” 


“They’re baitin’ us into runnin’ a picture of Danny in his cute little jail outfit. Then 
Wilbanks can run back to the Judge and claim the jury pool has been poisoned yet again. 
Don’t fall for it.” 

My naïveté shocked me again. Wiley had been positioned outside the jail in another 
effort to ambush Padgitt when they loaded him up for court. I could see a large front page 
photo of him in his orange coveralls. 

Lucien Wilbanks entered the courtroom from behind the bench. As usual, he seemed 
angry and perturbed, as if he’d just lost an argument with the Judge. He walked to the 
defense table, tossed down his legal pad, and scanned the crowd. His eyes locked onto me. 
They narrowed and his jaws clenched, and I thought he might hop over the bar and attack. 
His client turned around and began looking too. Someone pointed, and Mr. Danny Padgitt 
himself commenced glaring at me as if I might be his next victim. I was having trouble 
breathing, but I tried to keep calm. Baggy inched away. 

In the front row behind the defense crowd were several Padgitts, all older than Danny. 
They, too, joined the staring, and I had never felt so vulnerable. These were violent men 
who knew nothing but crime, intimidation, leg breaking, killing, and there I was in the 
same room with them while they dreamed of ways to cut my throat. 

A bailiff called us to order and everybody stood to acknowledge the entrance of His 
Honor. “Please be seated,” he said. 

Loopus scanned the papers while we waited, then he adjusted his reading glasses and said, 
“This is a motion to change venue, filed by the defense. Mr. Wilbanks, how many 
witnesses do you have?” 

“Half a dozen, give or take. We’ll see how things go.” 

“And the State?” 

A short round man with no hair and a black suit bounced to his feet and said, “About the 
same.” His name was Ernie Gaddis, the longtime, part-time District Attorney from up in 
Tyler County. 

“I don’t want to be here all day,” Loopus mumbled, as if he had an afternoon golf game. 
“Call your first witness, Mr. Wilbanks.” 

“Mr. Walter Pickard.” 

The name was unknown to me, which was expected, but Baggy had never heard of him 
either. During the preliminary questions it was established that he had lived in Karaway 
for over twenty years, went to church every Sunday and the Rotary Club every Thursday. 
For a living he owned a small furniture factory. 


“Must buy lumber from the Padgitts,” Baggy whispered.
His wife was a schoolteacher. He had coached Little League baseball and worked with


the Boy Scouts. Lucien pressed on and did a masterful job of laying the groundwork that 
Mr. Pickard knew his community well. 
Karaway was a smaller town eighteen miles west of Clanton. Spot had always neglected 

the place and we sold very few papers there. And even fewer ads. In my youthful 
eagerness, I was already contemplating the expansion of my empire. A small weekly in 
Karaway would sell a thousand copies, I thought. 

“When did you first hear that Miss Kassellaw had been murdered?” Wilbanks asked. 

“Couple of days after it happened,” Mr. Pickard said. “News is sometimes slow getting to
Karaway.”
“Who told you?”
“One of my employees came in with the story. She has a brother who lives around Beech


Hill, where it happened.”
“Did you hear that someone had been arrested for the murder?” Lucien asked. Ho


prowled around the courtroom like a bored cat. Just going through the motions, yet
missing nothing.
“Yes, the rumor was that one of the young Padgitts had been arrested.”
“Did you later confirm this?”
“Yes.”
“How?”
“I saw the story in The Ford County Times. There was a large photo of Danny Padgitt on


the front page, right next to a large photo of Rhoda Kassellaw.”

“Did you read the reports in the Times?”
“I did.”
“And did you form an opinion about Mr. Padgitt’s guilt or innocence?”
“He looked guilty to me. In the photo he had blood all over his shirt. His face was placed


right next to that of the victim’s, you know, side by side. The headline was huge and said 
something like, DANNY PADGITT ARRESTED FOR MURDER. “ 


“So you assumed he was guilty?”
“It was impossible not to.”
“What’s been the reaction to the murder in Karaway?”
“Shock and outrage. This is a peaceful county. Serious crimes are rare.”
“In your opinion, do folks over there generally believe Danny Padgitt raped and


murdered Rhoda Kassellaw?”
“Yes, especially after the way the newspaper has treated the story.”
I could feel stares from all directions, but I kept telling myself that we had done nothing


wrong. People suspected Danny Padgitt because the rotten sonofabitch had committed the
crimes.
“In your opinion, can Mr. Padgitt receive a fair trial in Ford County?”
“No.”


“Upon what do you base this opinion?”
“He’s already been tried and convicted by the newspaper.” “Do you think your opinion is
shared by most of your friends and neighbors over in Karaway?”


“I do.”


“Thank you.”


Mr. Ernie Gaddis was on his feet, holding a legal pad as if it were a weapon. “Say you’re


in the furniture business, Mr. Pickard?”
“Yes, that’s correct.”
“You buy lumber locally?”
“We do.”
“From whom?”
Pickard readjusted his weight and pondered the question. “Gates Brothers, Henderson,


Tiffee, Voyles and Sons, maybe one or two others.”
Baggy whispered, “Padgitt owns Voyles.”



“You buy any lumber from the Padgitts?” Gaddis asked.
“No sir.”
“Now or at any time in the past?”
“No sir.”
“Any of these lumberyards owned by the Padgitts?”
“Not to my knowledge.”
The truth was that no one really knew what the Padgitts owned. For decades they’d had


their tentacles in so many businesses, legitimate or otherwise. Mr. Pickard may not have 
been well known in Clanton, but, at that moment, he was suspected of having some 
relationship with the Padgitts. Why would he voluntarily testify on Danny’s behalf? 

Gaddis shifted gears. “Now, you said that the bloody photograph had much to do with
your assumption that the boy is guilty, that right?”
“It made him look very suspicious.”
“Did you read the entire story?”


“I believe so.”
“Did you read where it says that Mr. Danny Padgitt was involved in an auto accident, that
he was injured, and that he was also charged with drunk driving?”


“I believe I read that, yes.”
“Would you like for me to show it to you?”
“No, I remember it.”
“Good, then why were you so quick to assume the blood came from the victim and not


from Mr. Padgitt himself?”


Pickard shifted again and looked frustrated. “I simply said that the photos and the stories,
when taken together, make him look guilty.”
“You ever serve on a jury, Mr. Pickard?”
“No sir.”
“Do you understand what’s meant by the presumption of innocence?”



“Yes.”


“Do you understand that the State of Mississippi must prove Mr. Padgitt guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt?”
“Yes.”
“Do you believe everyone accused of a crime is entitled to a fair trial?”
“Yes, of course.”
“Good. Let’s say you got a summons for jury service in this case. You’ve read the


newspaper reports, listened to all the gossip, all the rumors, all that mess, and you arrive 
in this very courtroom for the trial. You’ve already testified that you believe Mr. Padgitt 
to be guilty. Let’s say you’re selected for the jury. Let’s say that Mr. Wilbanks, a very 
skilled and experienced lawyer, attacks the State’s case and raises serious doubts about 
our proof. Let’s say there’s doubt in your mind, Mr. Pickard. Gould you at that point vote 
not guilty?” 

He nodded as he followed along, then said, “Yes, under those circumstances.” 

“So, regardless of how you now feel about guilt or innocence, you would be willing to
listen to the evidence and weigh it fairly before you decide the case?”
The answer was so obvious that Mr. Pickard had no choice but to say, “Yes.”
“Of course,” Gaddis agreed. “And what about your wife? You mentioned her. She’s a


schoolteacher, right? She would be as open-minded as you, wouldn’t she?”
“I think so. Yes.”
“And what about those Rotarians over there in Karaway. Are they as fair as you?”
“I suppose so.”
“And your employees, Mr. Pickard. Surely you hire honest, fair-minded people. They’d


be able to ignore what they’ve read and heard and try this boy justly, wouldn’t they?”
“I suppose.”
“No further questions, Your Honor.”
Mr. Pickard hustled off the witness stand and hurried from the courtroom. Lucien


Wilbanks stood and said, rather loudly, “Your Honor, the defense calls Mr. Willie 
Traynor.” 


A brick to the nose could not have hit Mr. Willie Traynor with more force. I gasped for


air and heard Baggy say, too loudly, “Oh shit.”
Harry Rex was sitting in the jury box with some other lawyers, taking in the festivities.
As I wobbled to my feet, I looked at him desperately for help. He was rising too.


“Your Honor,” he said. “I represent Mr. Traynor, and this young man has not been


notified that he would be a witness.” Go Harry Rex! Do something!
The Judge shrugged and said, “So? He’s here. What’s the difference?” There was not a
trace of concern in his voice, and I knew I was nailed.


“Preparation for one thing. A witness has a right to be prepped.”
“I believe he’s the newspaper editor, is he not?”
“He is.”
Lucien Wilbanks was walking toward the jury box as if he might take a swing at Harry


Rex. He said, “Your Honor, he’s not a litigant, and he will not be a witness at trial. He 
wrote the stories. Let’s hear from him.” 

“It’s an ambush, Judge,” Harry Rex said.
“Sit down, Mr. Vonner,” His Honor said, and I took a seat in the witness chair. I fired a
look at Harry Rex as if to say, “Nice work, lawyer.”


A bailiff stood in front of me and said, “Are you armed?”
“What?” I was beyond nervous and nothing made sense.
“A gun. Do you have a gun?”
“Yes.”
“Can I have it, please?”
“Uh, it’s in the car.” Most of the spectators thought this was funny. Evidently, in


Mississippi, one cannot properly testify if one is armed. Another silly rule. Moments later 
the rule made perfect sense. If I’d had a gun, I would’ve begun firing in the direction of 
Lucien Wilbanks. 

The bailiff then swore me to tell the truth, and I watched as Wilbanks began pacing. The 
crowd behind him looked even larger. He began pleasantly enough with some 
preliminary inquiries about me and my purchase of the paper. I managed the correct 


answers, though I was extremely suspicious of every question. He was going somewhere; 
I had no idea where. 

The crowd seemed to enjoy this. My sudden takeover of the Times was still the source of 
interest and speculation, and, suddenly, there I was, in plain view of everyone, chatting 
about it under oath and on the record. 

After a few minutes of niceties, Mr. Gaddis, who I assumed was on my side since Lucien 
certainly was not, stood and said, “Your Honor, this is all very informative. Where, 
exactly, is it going?” 

“Good question. Mr. Wilbanks?” 

“Hang on, Judge.” 

Lucien then produced copies of the Times and passed them to me, Gaddis, and Loopus. 
He looked at me and said, “Just for the record, Mr. Traynor, how many subscribers does 
the Times have now?” 

“About forty-two hundred,” I answered with a little pride. When the bankruptcy hit Spot 
had squandered all but twelve hundred or so. 

“And how many copies are sold at the newsstand?” 

“Roughly a thousand.” 

Roughly twelve months earlier I had been living on the third floor of a fraternity house in 
Syracuse, New York, attending class occasionally, working hard to be a good soldier in 
the sexual revolution, drinking prodigious amounts of alcohol, smoking pot, sleeping 
until noon anytime I felt like it, and for exercise I’d hustle over to the next antiwar rally 
and scream at the police. I thought I had problems. How I’d gone from there to a witness 
chair in the Ford County courtroom was suddenly very unclear to me. 

However, at that crucial moment in my new career, I had several hundred of my fellow 
citizens, and subscribers, staring at me. It was not the time to appear vulnerable. 

“What percentage of your newspapers are sold in Ford County, Mr. Traynor?” he asked, 
as casually as if we were talking business over coffee. 

“Virtually all. I don’t have the exact numbers.” 

“Well, do you have any newsstands outside of Ford County?” 

“No.” 


Mr. Gaddis attempted another lame rescue. He stood and said, “Your Honor, please,


where is this going?”
Wilbanks suddenly raised his voice and lifted a finger toward the ceiling. “I will argue,
Your Honor, that potential jurors in this county have been poisoned by the sensational
coverage thrust upon us by The Ford County Times. Mercifully, and justifiably, this
newspaper has not been seen or read in other parts of the state. A change of venue is not
only fair, but mandatory.”


The word “poisoned” changed the tone of the proceedings dramatically. It stung me and
frightened me, and once again I asked myself if I had done something wrong. I looked at
Baggy for consolation, but he was ducking behind the lady in front of him.


“I’ll decide what’s fair and mandatory, Mr. Wilbanks. Proceed,” Judge Loopus said


sharply.
Mr. Wilbanks held up the paper and pointed to the front page. “I refer to the photograph
of my client,” he said. “Who took this photograph?”


“Mr. Wiley Meek, our photographer.”
“And who made the decision to put it on the front page?”
“I did.”
“And the size? Who determined that?”
“I did.”
“Did it occur to you that this might be considered sensational?”
Damned right. Sensational was what I was after. “No,” I replied coolly. “It happened to


be the only photo we had of Danny Padgitt at the moment. He happened to be the only


person arrested for the crime. We ran it. I’d run it again.”
My haughtiness surprised me. I glanced at Harry Rex and saw one of his nasty grins. He
was nodding. Go get ‘em, boy.


“So in your opinion it was fair to run this photo?”
“I don’t think it was unfair.”
“Answer my question. In your opinion, was it fair?”
“Yes, it was fair, and it was accurate.”



Wilbanks seemed to record this, then filed it away for future use. “Your report has a 
rather detailed description of the interior of the home of Rhoda Kassellaw. When did you 
inspect the home?” 

“I have not.”
“When did you enter the home?”
“I have not.”
“You’ve never seen the interior of the house?”
“That’s correct.”
He flipped open the newspaper, scanned it for a moment, then said, “You report that the


bedroom of Miss Kassellaw’s two small children was down a short hallway, 
approximately fifteen feet from her bedroom door, and you estimate that their beds were 
about thirty feet from hers. How do you know this?” 

“I have a source.”
“A source. Has your source been in the house?”
“Yes.”
“Is your source a police officer or a deputy?”
“He will remain confidential.”
“How many confidential sources did you use for these stories?”
“Several.”
From my journalism studies I vaguely remembered the case of a reporter who, in a


similar situation, relied on sources and then refused to reveal their identity. This had 
somehow upset the Judge, who ordered the reporter to divulge his sources. When he 
refused again, the Judge held him in contempt and the cops hauled him away to jail 
where he spent many weeks hiding the identity of his informants. I couldn’t remember 
the ending, but the reporter was eventually let go and the free press endured. 

In a flash, I saw myself being handcuffed by Sheriff Coley and dragged away, screaming 
for Harry Rex, then thrown into the jail where I’d be stripped and handed a pair of those 
orange coveralls. 

It would certainly be a bonanza for the Times. Boy, the stories I could write from in there. 


Wilbanks continued, “You report that the children were in shock. How do you know
this?”
“I spoke with Mr. Deece, the next-door neighbor.”
“Did he use the word ‘shock’?”


“He did.”
“You report that the children were examined by a doctor here in Clanton on the night of
the crime. How did you know this?”


“I had a source, and later I confirmed this with the doctor.”


“And you report that the children are now undergoing some type of therapy back home in
Missouri. Who told you that?”
“I talked to their aunt.”
He tossed the newspaper on the table and took a few steps in my direction. His bloodshot


eyes narrowed and glared at me. Here, the pistol would’ve been useful.
“The truth is, Mr. Traynor, you tried to paint the unmistakable picture that these two little


innocent children saw their mother get raped and murdered in her own bed, isn’t that
right?”
I took a deep breath and weighed my response. The courtroom was silent, waiting. “I


have reported the facts as accurately as possible,” I said, staring straight at Baggy, who,


though he was pecking around the lady in front of him, at least was nodding at me.
“In an effort to sell newspapers, you relied on unnamed sources and half-truths and
gossip and wild speculation, all in an effort to sensationalize this story.”


“I have reported the facts as accurately as possible,” I said again, trying to remain calm.


He snorted and said, “Is that so?” He grabbed the newspaper again and said, “I quote:
‘Will the children testify at trial?’ Did you write that, Mr. Traynor?”
I couldn’t deny it. I kicked myself for writing it. It was the last section of the reports that


Baggy and I had haggled over. We’d both been a little squeamish, and, with hindsight,
we should have followed our instincts.
Denial was not possible. “Yes,” I said.
“Upon what accurate facts did you base that question?”



“It was a question I heard asked many times after the crime,” I said. 

He flung the newspaper back on his table as if it were pure filth. He shook his head in 

mock bewilderment. “There are two children, right, Mr. Traynor?” 

“Yes. A boy and a girl.” 

“How old is the little boy?” 

“Five.” 

“And how old is the little girl?” 

“Three.” 

“And how old are you, Mr. Traynor?” 

“Twenty-three.” 

“And in your twenty-three years, how many trials have you covered as a reporter?” 

“None.” 

“How many trials have you seen, period?” 

“None.” 

“Since you are so ignorant about trials, what type of legal research did you do in order to


accurately prepare yourself for these stories?”
At this point I would have probably turned the gun on myself.
“Legal research?” I repeated, as if he were speaking another language.
“Yes, Mr. Traynor. How many cases did you find where children age five or younger


were allowed to testify in a criminal trial?”


I glanced in the direction of Baggy, who, evidently was now under the wooden bench.
“None,” I said.
“Perfect answer, Mr. Traynor. None. In the history of this state, no child under the age of


eleven has ever testified in a criminal trial. Please write that down somewhere, and


remember it the next time you attempt to inflame your readers with yellow journalism.”
“Enough, Mr. Wilbanks,” Judge Loopus said, a little too gently for my liking. I think he
and the other lawyers, probably including Harry Rex, were enjoying this quick butchering



of someone who’d meddled in legal affairs and gotten it all wrong. Even Mr. Gaddis 
seemed content to let me bleed. 

Lucien was wise enough to stop when the blood was flowing. He growled something like, 
“I’m through with him.” Mr. Gaddis had no questions. The bailiff motioned for me to 
step down, off the witness chair, and I tried desperately to walk upright back to the bench 
where Baggy was still hunkering down, like a stray dog in a hailstorm. 

I scribbled notes through the rest of the hearing, but it was a failing effort to look busy 
and important. I could feel the stares. I was humiliated and wanted to lock myself in my 
office for a few days. 

Wilbanks ended things with an impassioned plea to move the case somewhere far away, 
maybe even the Gulf Coast, where perhaps a few folks had heard of the crime but no one 
had been “poisoned” by the Times’s coverage of it. He railed against me and my 
newspaper, and he went overboard. Mr. Gaddis, in his closing remarks, reminded the 
Judge of the old saying, “Strong and bitter words indicate a weak cause.” 

I wrote that down. Then I hustled out of the courtroom as if I had an important deadline. 

Chapter 11 

Baggy rushed into my office late the following morning with the hot news that Lucien 
Wilbanks had just withdrawn his motion to change venue. As usual, he was full of 
analysis. 

His first windy opinion was that the Padgitts didn’t want the trial moved to another 
county. They knew Danny was dead guilty and that he would almost certainly be 
convicted by a properly selected jury anywhere. Their sole chance was to get a jury they 
could either buy or intimidate. Since all guilty verdicts must be unanimous, they needed 
only a single vote in Danny’s favor. Just one vote and the jury would hang itself; the 
Judge would be required by law to declare a mistrial. It would certainly be retried, but 
with the same result. After three or four attempts, the State would give up. 

I was sure Baggy had been at the courthouse all morning, replaying with his little club the 
venue hearing and borrowing the conclusions of the lawyers. He explained gravely that 
the hearing the day before had been staged by Lucien Wilbanks, for two reasons. First, 
Lucien was baiting the Times into running another large photo of Danny, this one in 
jailhouse garb. Second, Wilbanks wanted to get me on the witness stand to peel off some 
skin. “He damned sure did that,” Baggy said. 

“Thanks, Baggy,” I said. 


Wilbanks was setting the stage for the trial, one that he knew all along would take place 
in Clanton, and he wanted the Times to tone down its coverage. 

The third, or fourth, reason was that Lucien Wilbanks never missed an opportunity to 
grandstand in front of a crowd. Baggy had seen it many times and he shared a few stories. 

I’m not sure I followed all of his expansive thinking, but at that moment nothing else 
made sense. It seemed such a waste of time and effort to put on a two-hour hearing, 
knowing full well it was all a show. I figured worse things have happened in courtrooms. 

*** 

The third feast was a pot roast, and we ate on the porch as it rained steadily. 

As usual, I confessed that I’d never had a pot roast, so Miss Callie described the recipe 
and the preparation in detail. She lifted the lid off a large iron pot in the center of the 
table and closed her eyes as the thick aroma wafted upward. I had only been awake for an 
hour, and at that moment I could’ve eaten the tablecloth. 

It was her simplest dish, she said. Take a beef rump roast, leave the fat on it, place it in 
the bottom of the pot, then cover it with new potatoes, onions, turnips, carrots, and beets; 
add some salt, pepper, and water, put it in the oven on slow bake, and wait five hours. 
She filled my plate with beef and vegetables, then covered it all with a thick sauce. “The 
beets give it all a purple tint,” she explained. 

She asked me if I wanted to say the blessing, and I declined. Praying was not something I 
had done in a long time. She was far more gifted. She took my hands and we closed our 
eyes. As she spoke to heaven the rain tapped the tin roof above our heads. 

“Where’s Esau?” I asked after my first three large bites. 

“At work. Sometimes he can get free for lunch, often he cannot.” She was preoccupied 
with something and finally said, “Can I ask you a question that’s somewhat personal?” 

“Sure, I guess.” 

“Are you a Christian child?” 

“I’m sure I am. My mother used to take me to church on Easter.” 


That was not satisfactory. Whatever she was looking for, that wasn’t it. “What kind of 
church?” 

“Episcopalian. St. Luke’s in Memphis.” 

“I’m not sure we have one of those in Clanton.” 

“I haven’t seen one.” Not that I’d been searching diligently for a house of worship. 
“What kind of church do you attend?” I asked. 

“Church of God in Christ,” she answered quickly and her entire face had a serene glow. 
“My pastor is the Reverend Thurston Small, a fine man of God. A powerful preacher too. 
You should come hear him.” 

I’d heard stories about how blacks worship, how the entire Sabbath was spent at church, 
how services ran late into the night and broke up only when the spirit was finally 
exhausted. I had vivid memories of suffering through Episcopal Easter services that, by 
law, could run no longer than sixty minutes. 

“Do white people worship with you?” I asked. 

“Only during the election years. Some of the politicians come sniffing around like dogs. 
They make a bunch of promises.” 

“Do they stay for the entire service?” 

“Oh no. They’re always too busy for that.” 

“So it’s possible to come and go?” 

“For you, Mr. Traynor, yes. We’ll make an exception.” She launched into a long story 
about her church, which was within walking distance of her home, and a fire that 
destroyed it not too many years earlier. The fire department, which of course was on the 
white side of town, was never in a hurry when responding to calls in Lowtown. They lost 
their church, but it was a blessing! Reverend Small rallied the congregation. For nearly 
three years they met in a warehouse loaned to them by Mr. Virgil Mabry, a fine Christian 
man. The building was one block off Main Street and many white folks didn’t like the 
idea of Negroes worshiping on their side of town. Hut Mr. Mabry held firm. Reverend 
Small raised the money, and three years after the fire they cut the ribbon on a new 
sanctuary, one twice as big as the old. Now it was full every Sunday. 

I loved it when she talked. It allowed me to eat nonstop, which was a priority. But I was 
still captivated by her precise diction, her cadence, and her vocabulary, which had to be 
college level. 

When she finished with the new sanctuary, she asked, “Do you read the Bible often?” 


“No,” I said, shaking my head and chewing on a hot turnip.
“Never?”
Lying never crossed my mind. “Never.”
That disappointed her again. “How often do you pray?”
I paused for a second and said, “Once a week, right here.”
She slowly placed her knife and fork beside her plate and frowned at me as if something


profound was about to be said. “Mr. Traynor, if you don’t go to church, don’t read your


Bible, and don’t pray, I’m not so sure you’re really a Christian child.”
I wasn’t so sure either. I kept chewing so I wouldn’t have to speak and defend myself.
She continued, “Jesus said, ‘Judge not, that ye be not judged.’ It’s not my place to pass
judgment on anyone’s soul, but I must confess that I’m worried about yours.”


I was worried too, but not to the point of disrupting lunch.
“Do you know what happens to those who live outside the will of God?” she asked.
Nothing good, I knew that much. But I was too hungry and too frightened to answer. She


was preaching now, not eating, and I was not enjoying myself.


“Paul wrote in Romans, ‘The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord.’ Do you know what that means, Mr. Traynor?”
I had a hunch. I nodded and took a mouthful of beef. Had she memorized the entire Bible?


Was I about to hear it all?


“Death is always physical, but a spiritual death means eternity away from our Lord Jesus.
Death means an eternity in hell, Mr. Traynor. Do you understand this:’”
She was making things very clear. “Can we change the subject?” I said.
Miss Callie suddenly smiled and said, “Of course. You’re my guest and it’s my job to


make sure you feel welcome.” She took up her fork again and for a long time we ate and


listened to the rain.
“It’s been a very wet spring,” she said. “Good for beans but my tomatoes and melons
need some sunshine.”


I was comforted to know she was planning future meals. My story about Miss Callie and 
Esau and their remarkable children was almost complete. I was dragging out the research 


in hopes of spending a few more Thursday lunches on her porch. At first I had felt guilty 
for having so much food prepared just for me; we ate only a fraction of it. But she 
assured me that nothing was thrown out. She and Esau and perhaps some friends would 
make sure the leftovers were properly put away. “Nowadays, I only cook three times a 
week,” she admitted with a hint of shame. 

Dessert was peach cobbler and vanilla ice cream. We agreed to wait an hour so we could 
pace ourselves. She brought two cups of strong black coffee and we moved to the rocking 
chairs where we did our work. I pulled out my reporter’s pad and pen and began making 
up questions. Miss Callie loved it when I wrote down things she said. 

Her first seven children had Italian names—Alberto (Al), Leonardo (Leon), Massimo 
(Max), Roberto (Bobby), Gloria, Carlota, and Mario. Only Sam, the youngest and the one 
rumored to be on the lam, had an American name. During my second visit she had 
explained that she had been raised in an Italian home, right there in Ford County, but it 
was a very long story and she was saving it for later. 

The first seven had all been valedictorians of their classes at Burley Street High, the 
colored school. Each had earned a PhD and now taught in college. The biographical 
details filled pages, and Miss Callie, rightly so, could talk about her children for hours. 

And so she talked. I scribbled notes, rocked gently in my chair, listened to the rain, and 
finally fell asleep. 

Chapter 12 

Baggy had some reservations about the Ruffin story. “It’s really not news,” he said as he 
read it. I’m sure Hardy had alerted him that I was considering a large, front page story 
about a family of Negroes. “This stuff is usually on page five,” he said. 

Absent a murder, Baggy’s notion of front page news was a hot property line dispute 
being waged in the courtroom with no jurors, a handful of half-asleep lawyers, and a 
ninety-year-old Judge brought back from the grave to referee such matters. 

In 1967, Mr. Caudle had shown guts in running black obituaries, but in the three years 
since then the Times had taken little interest in anything on the other side of the railroad 
tracks. Wiley Meek was reluctant to go over with me and photograph Callie and Esau in 
front of their home. I managed to schedule the picture taking on a Thursday, at midday. 
Fried catfish, hush puppies, and coleslaw. Wiley ate until he had trouble breathing. 


Margaret was also skittish about the story, but, as always, she deferred to the boss. In fact, 
the entire office was cool to the idea. I didn’t care. I was doing what I thought was right; 
plus there was a big trial around the corner. 

And so, on Wednesday, May 20, 1970, during a week in which there was absolutely 
nothing to print about the Kassellaw murder, the Times devoted more than half of its 
front page to the Ruffin family. It began with a large headline—RUFFIN FAMILY 
BOASTS SEVEN COLLEGE PROFESSORS. Under it was a large photo of Callie and 
Esau sitting on their front steps, smiling proudly at the camera. Below them were the 
senior portraits of all eight children—Al through Sam. My story began: 

When Calia Harris was forced to drop out of school in the tenth grade, she promised 
herself her children would be able to finish not only high school but college as well. The 
year was 1926, and Calia, or Callie as she prefers to be called, was, at the age of fifteen, 
the oldest of four children. Education became a luxury when her father died of 
tuberculosis. Callie worked for the DeFarnette family until 1929, when she married Esau 
Ruffin, a carpenter and part-time preacher. They rented a small duplex in Lowtown for 
$15 a month and began saving every penny. They would need all they could save. 

In 1931, Alberto was born. 

In 1970, Dr. Alberto Ruffin was a professor of sociology at the University of Iowa. Dr. 
Leonardo Ruffin was a professor of biology at Purdue. Dr. Massimo Ruffin was a 
professor of economics at the University of Toledo. Dr. Roberto Ruffin was a professor 
of history at Marquette. Dr. Gloria Ruffin Sanderford taught Italian at Duke. Dr. Carlota 
Ruffin was a professor of urban studies at UCLA. Dr. Mario Ruffin had just completed 
his PhD in medieval literature and was a professor teaching at Grinnell College in Iowa. I 
mentioned Sam but didn’t dwell on him. 

By phone I had talked to all seven of the professors, and I quoted liberally from them in 
my story. The themes were common—love, sacrifice, discipline, hard work, 
encouragement, faith in God, faith in family, ambition, perseverance; no tolerance for 
laziness or failure. Each of the seven had a success story that could have filled an entire 
edition of the Times.Each had worked at least one full-time job while struggling through 
college and grad school. Most had worked two jobs. The older ones helped the younger 
ones. Mario told me he received five or six small checks each month from his siblings 
and parents. 

The five older ones had been so tenacious in their studies that they had postponed 
marriage until in their late twenties and early thirties. Carlota and Mario were still single. 
Likewise, the next generation was being carefully planned. Leon had the oldest 


grandchild, age five. There were a total of five. Max and his wife were expecting their 
second. 

There was so much material on the Ruffins that I ran only Part One that week. When I 
went to Lowtown for lunch the next day, Miss Callie met me with tears in her eyes. Esau 
met me too, with a firm handshake and a stiff, awkward, manly hug. We devoured a lamb 
stew and compared notes on how the story was being received. Needless to say, it was the 
talk of Lowtown, with neighbors stopping by all Wednesday afternoon and Thursday 
morning with extra copies. I had mailed a half dozen or so to each of the professors. 

Over coffee and fried apple pies, their preacher, Reverend Thurston Small, parked in the 
street and made his way to the porch. I was introduced, and he seemed pleased to meet 
me. He quickly accepted a dessert and began a lengthy summary of how important the 
Ruffin story was to the black community of Clanton. Obituaries were fine, and in most 
Southern towns dead black folks were still ignored. Thanks to Mr. Caudle, progress was 
being made on one front. But to run such a grand and dignified profile of an outstanding 
black family on the front page was a giant step for racial tolerance in the town. I didn’t 
see it that way. It was just a good human interest story about Miss Callie Ruffin and her 
extraordinary family. 

The reverend enjoyed food and he also had a knack for embellishment. On his second pie, 
he became monotonous in his praise for the story. He gave no indication of leaving 
anytime that afternoon, so I finally excused myself. 

*** 

Other than being the unofficial and somewhat unreliable janitor for several businesses 
around the square, Piston had another job. He had an unlicensed courier service. Every 
hour or so he would appear inside the front doors of his clients—primarily law offices, 
but also the three banks, some Realtors, insurance agents, and the Times–and he would 
stand there for a few moments waiting for something to deliver. A simple shake of the 
head by a secretary would send him on his way to his next stop. If a letter or small 
package needed to be delivered, the secretaries would wait for Piston to pop in. He would 
grab whatever it was and jog it over to its destination. If it weighed over ten pounds, 
forget it. Since he was on foot, his service was limited to the square and maybe one or 
two blocks around it. At almost any hour of the working day Piston could be seen 
downtown—walking, if he had no package, and jogging if he did. 

The bulk of his traffic was letters between law offices. Piston was much faster than the 
mail, and much cheaper. He charged nothing. He said it was his service to his community, 
though at Christmas he fully expected a ham or a cake. 


He darted in late Friday morning with a hand-addressed letter from Lucien Wilbanks. I 
was almost afraid to open it. Could it be the million-dollar lawsuit he’d promised? It read: 

Dear Mr. Traynor: 

I enjoyed your profile on the Ruffin family, a most remarkable clan. I had heard of their 
achievements, but your story provided great insight. I admire your courage. 

I hope you continue in this more positive vein. 

Sincerely, 

Lucien Wilbanks 

I detested the man, but who wouldn’t have appreciated the note? He enjoyed his 
reputation as a wild-eyed radical liberal who embraced unpopular causes. As such, his 
support at that moment gave limited comfort. And I knew it was only temporary. 

There were no other letters. No anonymous phone calls. No threats. School was out and 
the weather was hot. The ominous and much-dreaded winds of desegregation were 
gathering strength. The good folks of Ford County had more important matters to worry 
about. 

After a decade of strife and tension over civil rights, many white Mississippians were 
fearful that the end was near. If the federal courts could integrate the schools, could 
churches and housing be next? 

The following day, Baggy went to a public meeting in the basement of a church. The 
organizers were trying to measure the support for a private, all-white school in Clanton. 
The crowd was large, frightened, angry, and determined to protect the children. A lawyer 
summarized the status of various federal appeals and delivered the distressing opinion 
that the final mandate would come that summer. He predicted that black kids in grades 
ten through twelve would be sent to Clanton High School and that white kids in grades 
seven through nine would be sent to Burley Street in Lowtown. This caused men to shake 
their heads and women to cry. The thought of white kids being shipped across the tracks 
was simply unacceptable. 


A new school was organized. We were asked not to report the story, at least not then. The 
organizers wanted to gain some financial commitments before going public. We 
complied with their requests. I was anxious to avoid controversy. 

A federal judge in Memphis ordered a massive busing plan that ripped the city apart. 
Inner-city black kids would be hauled to the white suburbs, and along the way they would 
pass the white kids going in the other direction. Tension was even greater there, and I 
found myself trying to avoid the city for a while. 

It would be a long, hot summer. It seemed as if we were waiting for things to explode. 

*** 

I skipped a week, then ran the second part of Miss Callie’s story. On the bottom of the 
front page I lined up current photos of the seven Ruffin professors. My story dealt with 
where they were now and what they were doing. Without exception they professed great 
love for Clanton and Mississippi, though none planned to ever return permanently. They 
refused to judge a place that had kept them in inferior schools, kept them on one side of 
the tracks, kept them from voting and eating in most restaurants and drinking water from 
the fountain on the courthouse lawn. They refused to dwell on anything negative. Instead, 
they thanked God for his goodness, for health, for family, for their parents, and for their 
opportunities. 

I marveled at their humility and kindness. Each of the seven promised to meet me during 
the Christmas vacation when we would sit on Miss Callie’s porch and eat pecan pie and 
tell stories. 

I finished my lengthy profile with an intriguing detail about the family. From the day 
each Ruffin child left home, he or she was instructed by Esau to write at least one letter a 
week to their mother. This they did, and the letters never stopped. At some point, Esau 
decided that Callie should receive a letter a day. Seven professors. Seven days in a week. 
So Alberto wrote his letter on Sunday, and mailed it. Leonardo wrote his on Monday, and 
mailed it. And so on. Some days Callie received two or three letters, some days none. But 
the short walk to the mailbox was always exciting. 

And she kept every letter. In a closet in the front bedroom, she showed me a stack of 
cardboard boxes, all filled with hundreds of letters from her children. 

“I’ll let you read them sometime,” she said, but for some reason I didn’t believe her. Nor 
did I want to read them. They would be far too personal. 


Chapter 13 

Ernie Gaddis, the District Attorney, filed a motion to enlarge the jury pool. According to 
Baggy, who was becoming more of an expert each day, in the typical criminal trial the 
Circuit Court clerk summoned about forty people for jury duty. About thirty-five would 
show up and at least five of those would be too old or too sick to be qualified. Gaddis 
argued in his motion that the increased notoriety of the Kassellaw murder would make it 
more difficult to find impartial jurors. He asked the Court to summon at least a hundred 
prospective jurors. 

What he didn’t say in writing, but what everybody knew, was that the Padgitts would 
have a harder time intimidating one hundred than forty. Lucien Wilbanks objected 
strenuously and demanded a hearing. Judge Loopus said one was not necessary and 
ordered a larger jury pool. He also took the unusual step of sealing the list of prospective 
jurors. Baggy and his drinking buddies, and everyone else around the courthouse, were 
shocked by this. It had never been done. The lawyers and litigants always got a complete 
list of the jury pool two weeks before trial. 

The order was generally viewed as a major setback to the Padgitts. If they didn’t know 
who was in the pool, then how could they bribe or frighten them? 

Gaddis then asked the Court to have the jury summons mailed, not personally served by 
the Sheriff’s office. Loopus liked this idea too. Evidently he was well aware of the cozy 
relationship between the Padgitts and our Sheriff. Not surprisingly, Lucien Wilbanks 
screamed over this plan. In his rather frantic responses he made the point that Judge 
Loopus was treating his client differently and unfairly. Reading his filings, I was amazed 
at how he could rant so clearly for so many pages. 

It was becoming obvious that Judge Loopus was determined to preside over a secure and 
unbiased trial. He had been the District Attorney back in the 1950s before ascending to 
the bench, and he was known for his pro-prosecution leanings. He certainly appeared to 
have little concern for the Padgitts and their legacy of corruption. Plus, on paper (and 
certainly in my paper), the case against Danny Padgitt appeared to be airtight. 

On Monday, June 15, amid great secrecy, the Circuit Court clerk mailed a hundred 
summonses for jury duty to registered voters all over Ford County. One arrived in the 
rather busy mailbox of Miss Callie Ruffin, and when I arrived for lunch on Thursday she 
showed it to me. 


***


In 1970, Ford County was 26 percent black, 74 percent white, with no fractions for others 
or those who weren’t certain. Six years after the tumultuous summer of 1964 and its 
massive push to register blacks, and five years after the Voting Rights Act of 1965, few 
bothered to sign up in Ford County. In the statewide elections of 1967, almost 70 percent 
of the eligible whites in the county had voted, while only 12 percent of the blacks did so. 
Registration drives in Lowtown were met with general indifference. One reason was that 
the county was so white that no black could ever be elected to a local office. So why 
bother? 

Another reason was the historical abuse at the point of enrolling. For a hundred years 
whites had used a variety of tricks to deny blacks proper registration. Poll taxes, literacy 
exams, the list was long and miserable. 

Yet another reason was the hesitancy by most blacks to be registered in any manner by 
white authorities. Registration could mean more taxes, more supervision, more 
surveillance, more intrusions. Registration could mean serving on juries. 

According to Harry Rex, who was a slightly more reliable courthouse source than Baggy, 
there had never been a black juror in Ford County. Since potential jurors were selected 
from the voter registration rolls and nowhere else, few showed up in a jury pool. Those 
who survived the early rounds of questioning were routinely excused before the final 
twelve were empaneled. In criminal cases, the prosecution routinely challenged blacks 
under the belief that they would be too sympathetic to the accused. In civil cases, the 
defense challenged them because they were feared as too liberal with the money of others. 

However, these theories had never been tested in Ford County. 

*** 

Callie and Esau Ruffin registered to vote in 1951. Together, they marched into the office 
of the Circuit Court clerk and asked to be added to the voter rolls. The deputy clerk, as 
she was trained to do, handed them a laminated card with the words “Declaration of 
Independence” across the top. The text was written in German. 

The clerk, assuming that Mr. and Mrs. Ruffin were as illiterate as most blacks in Ford 
County, said, “Can you read this?” 


“This is not English,” Callie said. “It’s German.” 

“Can you read it?” the clerk asked, realizing that she might have her hands full with this 
couple. 

“I can read as much of it as you can,” Callie said politely. 

The clerk withdrew the card and handed over another. “Can you read this?” she asked. 

“I can,” Callie said. “It’s the Bill of Rights.” 

“What does number eight say?” 

Callie read it slowly, then said, “The Eighth Amendment prohibits excessive fines and 
cruel punishments.” 

At about this time, depending on whose version was being described, Esau leaned in and 
said, “We are property owners.” He placed the deed to their home on the counter and the 
deputy clerk examined it. Property ownership was not a prerequisite to voting, but it was 
a huge asset if you were black. Not knowing what else to do, she said, “Fair enough. The 
poll tax will be two dollars each.” Esau handed over the money, and with that they joined 
the voter rolls with thirty-one other blacks, none of whom were women. 

They never missed an election. Miss Callie had always worried because so few of her 
friends bothered to register and vote, but she was too busy raising eight children to do 
much about it. Ford County was spared the racial unrest that was common throughout 
most of the state, so there was never an organized drive to register blacks. 

*** 

At first I couldn’t tell if she was anxious or excited. I’m not sure she knew either. The 
first black female voter might now become the first black juror. She had never backed 
away from a challenge, but she had grave moral concerns about judging another person. 
“‘Judge not, that ye be not judged,’” she said more than once, quoting Jesus. 

“But if everyone followed that verse of Scripture, our entire judicial system would fail, 
wouldn’t it?” I asked. 

“I don’t know,” she said, gazing away. I had never seen Miss Callie so preoccupied. 


We were eating fried chicken with mashed potatoes and gravy. Esau had not made it
home for lunch.
“How can I judge a man I know to be guilty?” she asked.


“First, you listen to the evidence,” I said. “You have an open mind. It won’t be difficult.”
“But you know he killed her. You all but said so in your paper.” Her brutal honesty hit
hard every time.


“We just reported the facts, Miss Callie. If the facts make him look guilty, then so be it.”
The gaps of silence were long and many that day. She was deep in thought and ate little.
“What about the death penalty?” she asked. “Will they want to put that boy in the gas


chamber?”
“Yes ma’am. It’s a capital murder case.”
“Who decides whether he is put to death?”
“The jury.”
“Oh my.”
She was unable to eat after that. She said her blood pressure had been up since she


received the jury summons. She had already been to the doctor. I helped her to the sofa in 
the den and took her a glass of ice water. She insisted that I finish my lunch, which I 
happily did in silence. Later, she rallied a bit and we sat on the porch in the rockers, 
talking about anything but Danny Padgitt and his trial. 

I finally hit paydirt when I asked her about the Italian influence in her life. Over our first 
lunch she had told me that she learned Italian before she learned English. Seven of her 
eight children had Italian names. 

She needed to tell me a long story. I had absolutely nothing else to do. 

*** 

In the 1890s, the price of cotton rose dramatically as demand increased around the world. 
The fertile regions of the South were under pressure to produce more. The large 


plantation owners in the Mississippi Delta desperately needed to increase their crops, but 
they faced a severe labor shortage. Many of the blacks who were physically able had fled 
the land their ancestors toiled as slaves for better jobs and certainly better lives up North. 
Those left behind were, understandably, less than enthusiastic about chopping and 
picking cotton for brutally low wages. 

The landowners hit upon a scheme to import industrious and hardworking European 
immigrants to raise cotton. Through contacts with Italian labor agents in New York and 
New Orleans, connections were made, promises swapped, lies told, contracts forged, and 
in 1895 the first boatload of families arrived in the Delta. They were from northern Italy, 
from the region of Emilia-Romagna, near Verona. For the most part they were poorly 
educated and spoke little English, though in any language they quickly realized they were 
on the bad end of a huge scam. They were given miserable living accommodations, in a 
subtropical climate, and while battling malaria and mosquitoes and snakes and rotten 
drinking water they were told to raise cotton for wages no one could live on. They were 
forced to borrow money at scandalous rates from the landowners. Their food and supplies 
came from the company store, at steep prices. 

Because the Italians worked hard the landowners wanted more of them. They dressed up 
their operations, made more promises to more Italian labor agents, and the immigrants 
kept coming. A system of peonage was fine tuned, and the Italians were treated worse 
than most black farmworkers. 

Over time some efforts were made to divide profits and transfer ownership of land, but 
the cotton markets fluctuated so wildly that the arrangements could never be stabilized. 
After twenty years of abuse, the Italians finally scattered and the experiment became 
history. 

Those who remained in the Delta were considered second-class citizens for decades. 
They were excluded from schools, and because they were Catholic they were not 
welcome in churches. The country clubs were off limits. They were “dagos” and shoved 
to the bottom of the social ladder. But because they worked hard and saved their money, 
they slowly accumulated land. 

The Rossetti family landed near Leland, Mississippi, in 1902. They were from a village 
near Bologna, and had the misfortune of listening to the wrong labor agent in that city. 
Mr. and Mrs. Rossetti brought with them four daughters, the oldest of which was Nicola, 
age twelve. Though they often went hungry the first year, they managed to avoid outright 
starvation. Penniless when they arrived, after three years of peonage the family had 
racked up $6,000 in debts to the plantation with no possible way of paying them off. 
They fled the Delta in the middle of the night and rode a boxcar to Memphis, where a 
distant relative took them in. 

At the age of fifteen, Nicola was stunningly beautiful. Long dark hair, brown eyes—a 
classic Italian beauty. She looked older than her years and managed to get a job in a 
clothing store by telling the owner she was eighteen. After three days, the owner offered 


her a marriage proposal. He was willing to divorce his wife of twenty years and say 
goodbye to his children if Nicola would run away with him. She said no. He offered Mr. 
Rossetti $5,000 as an incentive. Mr. Rossetti said no. 

In those days, the wealthy farming families in northern Mississippi did their shopping and 
socializing in Memphis, usually within walking distance of the Peabody Hotel. It was 
there that Mr. Zachary DeJarnette of Clanton had the blind luck of bumping into Nicola 
Rossetti. Two weeks later they were married. 

He was thirty-one, a widower with no children and in the midst of a serious search for a 
wife. He was also the largest landowner in Ford County, where the soil was not as rich as 
in the Delta, but still quite profitable if you owned enough of it. Mr. DeJarnette had 
inherited over four thousand acres from his family. His grandfather had once owned the 
grandfather of Calia Harris Ruffin. 

The marriage was a package deal. Nicola was wise beyond her years, and she was also 
desperate to protect her family. They had suffered so much. She saw an opportunity and 
took full advantage of it. Before she agreed to marriage, Mr. DeJarnette promised to not 
only employ her father as a farm supervisor but to provide his family with very 
comfortable housing. He agreed to educate her three younger sisters. He agreed to pay off 
the peonage debts from the Delta. So smitten was Mr. DeJarnette that he would’ve agreed 
to anything. 

The first Italians in Ford County arrived not in a broken ox cart, but rather by first-class 
passage on the Illinois Central Rail Line. A welcoming party unloaded their brand-new 
luggage and helped them into two 1904 Ford Model T’s. The Rossettis were treated like 
royalty as they followed Mr. DeJarnette from party to party in Clanton. The town was 
instantly abuzz with descriptions of how beautiful the bride was. There was talk of a 
formal wedding ceremony, to sort of buttress the quickie service in Memphis, but since 
there was no Catholic church in Clanton the idea was scrapped. The bride and groom had 
yet to address the sticky issue of religious preference. At that time, if Nicola had asked 
Mr. DeJarnette to convert to Hinduism he would have quickly done so. 

They finally made it to the main house at the edge of town. When the Rossettis turned 
into the long front drive and glimpsed the stately antebellum mansion built by the first Mr. 
DeJarnette, they all broke into tears. 

It was decided that they would live there until an overseer’s house could be renovated 
and made suitable. Nicola assumed her duties as the lady of the manor and tried her best 
to get pregnant. Her younger sisters were provided with private tutors, and within weeks 
were speaking good English. Mr. Rossetti spent each day with his son-in-law, who was 
only three years his junior, and learned how to run the plantation. 

And Mrs. Rossetti went to the kitchen where she met Callie’s mother, India. 


“My grandmother cooked for the DeJarnettes, so did my mother,” Miss Callie was saying. 
“I thought I would too, but it didn’t work out that way.” 

“Did Zack and Nicola have children?” I asked. I was on my third or fourth glass of tea. It 
was hot and the ice had melted. Miss Callie had been talking for two hours, and she had 
forgotten about the jury summons and the murder trial. 

“No. It was very sad because they wanted children so badly. When I was born in 1911, 
Nicola practically took me away from my mother. She insisted I have an Italian name. 
She kept me in the big house with her. My mother didn’t mind—she had plenty of other 
children, plus she was in the house all day long.” 

“What did your father do?” I asked. 

“Worked on the farm. It was a good place to work, and to live. We were very lucky 
because the DeJarnettes took care of us. They were good, fair people. Always. It wasn’t 
that way for a lot of Negro folk. Back then your life was controlled by the white man who 
owned your house. If he was mean and abusive, then your life was miserable. The 
DeJarnettes were wonderful people. My father, grandfather, and great-grandfather 
worked their land, and they were never mistreated.” 

“And Nicola?” 

She smiled for the first time in an hour. “God blessed me. I had two mothers. She dressed 
me in clothes she bought in Memphis. When I was a toddler she taught me to speak 
Italian while I was learning English. She taught me to read when I was three years old.” 

“You still speak Italian?” 

“No. It was a long time ago. She loved to tell me stories of being a little girl in Italy, and 
she promised me that one day she would take me there, to see the canals in Venice and 
the Vatican in Rome and the tower in Pisa. She loved to sing and she taught me about the 
opera.” 

“Was she educated?” 

“Her mother had some education, Mr. Rossetti did not, and she had made sure Nicola and 
her sisters could read and write. She promised me I would go to college somewhere up 
North, or maybe even in Europe where folks were more tolerant. The notion of a black 
woman going to college in the 1920s was downright crazy.” 

The story was running in many directions. I wanted to record some of it but I had not 
brought a notepad. The image of a young black girl living in an antebellum home 
speaking Italian and listening to the opera in Mississippi fifty years earlier had to be 
unique. 


“Did you work in the house?” I asked. 

“Oh yes, when I got older. I was a housekeeper, but I never had to work as hard as the 
others. Nicola wanted me close by. At least an hour every day we would sit in her parlor 
and practice speaking. She was determined to lose her Italian accent, and she was just as 
determined that I would have perfect diction. There was a retired schoolteacher from 
town, a Miss Tucker, an old maid, I’ll never forget her, and Nicola would send a car for 
her every morning. Over hot tea we would read a lesson and Miss Tucker would correct 
even the slightest mispronunciation. We studied grammar. We memorized vocabulary. 
Nicola drilled herself until she spoke perfect English.” 

“What happened to college?” 

She was suddenly exhausted and story time was over. “Ah, Mr. Traynor, it was very sad. 
Mr. DeJarnette lost everything back in the 1920s. He’d invested heavily in railroads and 
ships and stocks and such stuff, and went broke almost overnight. He shot himself, but 
that’s another story.” 

“What happened to Nicola?” 

“She managed to hold on to the big house until the Second War, then she moved back to 
Memphis with Mr. and Mrs. Rossetti. We swapped letters every week for years, I still 
have them. She died four years ago, at the age of seventy-six. I cried for a month. I still 
cry when I think of her. How I loved that woman.” Her words trailed off and I knew from 
experience that she was ready for a nap. 

Late that night I buried myself in the Times archives. On September 12, 1930, there was 
a front page story about the suicide of Zachary DeJarnette. Despondent over the collapse 
of his businesses, he had left a new will and a farewell note for his wife Nicola, then, to 
make things easier for everyone, he had driven to the funeral home in Clanton. He 
walked in the rear door with a double-barreled shotgun, found the embalming room, took 
a seat, took off a shoe, put the gun in his mouth, and pulled the trigger with a big toe. 

Chapter 14 

On Monday, June 22, all but eight of the hundred jurors arrived for the trial of Danny 
Padgitt. As we soon found out, four were dead and four had simply vanished. For the 
most part, the rest looked very anxious. Baggy said that usually jurors have no idea what 
kind of case they might be selected to decide when they arrive. Not so with the Padgitt 
trial. Every breathing soul in Ford County knew that the big day had finally come. 


Few things draw a crowd in a small town like a good murder trial, and the courtroom was 
full long before 9 A.M. The prospective jurors filled one side, spectators the other. The 
old balcony practically sagged above us. The walls were lined with people. As a show of 
strength, Sheriff Coley had every available uniformed body milling around, looking 
important, doing nothing productive. What a perfect time to pull a bank heist, I thought. 

Baggy and I were in the front row. He had convinced the Circuit Court clerk that we were 
entitled to press credentials, thus special seating. Next to me was a reporter from the 
newspaper in Tupelo, a pleasant gentleman who reeked of cheap pipe tobacco. I filled 
him in on the details of the murder, off the record. He seemed impressed with my 
knowledge. 

The Padgitts were there in full force. They sat in chairs pulled close to the defense table 
and huddled around Danny and Lucien Wilbanks like the den of thieves they really were. 
They were arrogant and sinister and I couldn’t help but hate every one of them. I didn’t 
know them by name; few people did. But as I watched them I wondered which one had 
been the incompetent arsonist who’d sneaked into our printing room with gallons of 
gasoline. I had my pistol in my briefcase. I’m sure they had theirs close by. A false move 
here or there and an old-fashioned gunfight would erupt. Throw in Sheriff Coley and his 
poorly trained but trigger-happy boys, and half the town would get wiped out. 

I caught a few stares from the Padgitts, but they were much more worried about the jurors 
than me. They watched them closely as they filed into the courtroom and took their 
instructions from the clerk. The Padgitts and their lawyers looked at lists that they had 
found somewhere. They compared notes. 

Danny was nicely but casually dressed in a white long-sleeved shirt and a pair of starched 
khakis. As instructed by Wilbanks, he was smiling a lot, as if he were really a nice kid 
whose innocence was about to be revealed. 

Across the aisle, Ernie Gaddis and his smaller crew were likewise observing the 
prospective jurors. Gaddis had two assistants, one a paralegal and one a part-time 
prosecutor named Hank Hooten. The paralegal carried the files and briefcases. Hooten 
seemed to do little but just be there so Ernie would have someone to confer with. 

Baggy leaned over as if it was time to whisper. “That guy there, brown suit,” he said, 
nodding at Hooten. “He was screwin’ Rhoda Kassellaw.” 

I was shocked and my face showed it. I jerked to the right and looked at Baggy. He 
nodded smugly and said what he always said when he had the scoop on something really 
nasty. “That’s what I’m tellin’ you,” he whispered. This meant that he had no doubts. 
Baggy was often wrong but never in doubt. 

Hooten appeared to be about forty with prematurely gray hair, nicely dressed, somewhat 
handsome. “Where’s he from?” I whispered. The courtroom was noisy as we waited for 
Judge Loopus. 


“Here. He does some real estate law, low-pressure stuff. A real jerk. Been divorced a 
couple of times, always on the prowl.” 

“Does Gaddis know his assistant was seeing the victim?” 

“Hell no. Ernie would pull him from the case.” 

“You think Wilbanks knows?” 

“Nobody knows,” Baggy said with even greater smugness. It was as if he had personally 
caught them in bed, then kept it to himself until that very moment in the courtroom. I 
wasn’t sure I believed him. 

Miss Callie arrived a few minutes before nine. Esau escorted her into the courtroom, then 
had to leave when he couldn’t find a seat. She checked in with the clerk and was placed 
in the third row; she was given a questionnaire to fill out. She looked around for me but 
there were too many people between us. I counted four other blacks in the pool. 

A bailiff bellowed for us to rise, and it sounded like a stampede. Judge Loopus told us to 
sit, and the floor shook. He went straight to work and appeared to be in good spirits. He 
had a courtroom full of voters and he was up for reelection in two years, though he had 
never had an opponent. Six jurors were excused because they were over the age of sixtyfive. Five were excused for medical reasons. The morning began to drag. I couldn’t take 
my eyes off Hank Hooten. He certainly had the look of a ladies’ man. 

When the preliminary questions were over, the panel was down to seventy-nine duly 
qualified jurors. Miss Callie was now in the second row, not a good sign if she wanted to 
avoid jury service. Judge Loopus yielded the floor to Ernie Gaddis, who introduced 
himself to the panel again and explained in great length that he was there on behalf of the 
State of Mississippi, the taxpayers, the citizens who had elected him to prosecute those 
who commit crimes. He was the people’s lawyer. 

He was there to prosecute Mr. Danny Padgitt, who had been indicted by a grand jury, 
made up of their fellow citizens, for the rape and murder of Rhoda Kassellaw. He asked if 
it was possible that anyone had not heard something about the murder. Not a single hand 
went up. 

Ernie had been talking to juries for thirty years. He was friendly and smooth and gave the 
impression that you could discuss almost anything with him, even in open court. He 
moved slowly into the area of intimidation. Has anyone outside your family contacted 
you about this case? A stranger? Has a friend tried to influence your opinion? Your 
summons was mailed to you; the jury list is locked under seal. No one is supposed to 
know that you’re a potential juror. Has anyone mentioned it to you? Anyone threatened 
you? Anyone offered you anything? The courtroom was very quiet as Ernie led them 
through these questions. 


No one raised a hand; none was expected. But Ernie was successful in conveying the 
message that these people, the Padgitts, had been moving through the shadows of Ford 
County. He hung an even darker cloud above them, and he left the impression that he, as 
the District Attorney and the people’s lawyer, knew the truth. 

He began his finish with a question that cut through the air like a rifle shot. “Do all of you 
folks understand that jury tampering is a crime?” 

They seemed to understand. 

“And that I, as the prosecutor, will pursue, indict, bring to trial, and do my utmost to 
convict any person involved with jury tampering. Do you understand this?” 

When Ernie finished we all felt as though we’d been tampered with. Anyone who’d 
talked about the case, which of course was every person in the county, seemed in danger 
of being indicted by Ernie and hounded to the grave. 

“He’s effective,” whispered the reporter from Tupelo. 

Lucien Wilbanks began with a lengthy and quite dull lecture about the presumption of 
innocence and how it is the foundation of American jurisprudence. Regardless of what 
they’d read in the local newspaper, and here he managed a scornful glance in my general 
direction, his client, sitting right there at the moment, was an innocent man. And if 
anyone felt otherwise, then he or she was duty bound to raise a hand and say so. 

No hands. “Good. Then by your silence you’re telling the Court that you, all of you, can 
look at Danny Padgitt right now and say he is innocent. Can you do that?” He hammered 
them on this for far too long, then shifted to the burden of proof with another lecture on 
the State’s monumental challenge to prove his client guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 

These two sacred protections—the presumption of innocence and proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt—were granted to all of us, including the jurors, by the very wise men 
who wrote our Constitution and Bill of Rights. 

We were approaching noon and everybody was anxious for a break. Wilbanks seemed to 
miss this and he kept rattling on. When he sat down at twelve-fifteen, Judge Loopus 
announced that he was starving. We would recess until two o’clock. 

Baggy and I had a sandwich upstairs in the Bar Room with several of his cronies, three 
aging washed-up lawyers who hadn’t missed a trial in years. Baggy really wanted a glass 
of whiskey, but for some odd reason felt the call of duty. His pals did not. The clerk had 
given us a list of jurors as they were currently seated. Miss Callie was number twentytwo, the first black and the third female. 


It was the general feeling that the defense would not challenge her because she was black, 
and blacks, according to the prevailing theory, were sympathetic to those accused of 
crimes. I wasn’t sure how a black person could be sympathetic to a white thug like Danny 
Padgitt, but the lawyers were unshakable in their belief that Lucien Wilbanks would 
gladly take her. 

Under the same theory, the prosecution would exercise one of its arbitrary, peremptory 
challenges and strike her from the panel. Not so, said Chick Elliot, the oldest and 
drunkest of the gang. “I’d take her if I were prosecuting,” he argued, then knocked back a 
potent shot of bourbon. 

“Why?” Baggy asked. 

“Because we know her so well, now, thanks to the Times. She came across as a sensible, 
God-fearing, Bible-quoting patriot, who raised all those kids with a heavy hand and a 
swift kick in the ass if they screwed up.” 

“I agree,” said Tackett, the youngest of the three. Tackett, though, had a tendency to 
agree with whatever the prevailing theory happened to be. “She’d make an ideal juror for 
the prosecution. Plus, she’s a woman. It’s a rape case. I’d take all the women I could get.” 

They argued for an hour. It was my first session with them, and I suddenly understood 
how Baggy collected so many differing opinions about so many issues. Though I tried 
not to show it, I was deeply concerned that my long and generous stories about Miss 
Callie would somehow come back to haunt her. 

*** 

After lunch, Judge Loopus moved into the most serious phase of questioning—the death 
penalty. He explained the nature of a capital offense and the procedures that would be 
followed, then he yielded again to Ernie Gaddis. 

Juror number eleven was a member of some obscure church and he made it very clear 
that he could never vote to send a person to the gas chamber. Juror number thirty-four 
was a veteran of two wars and he felt rather strongly that the death penalty wasn’t used 
often enough. This, of course, delighted Ernie, who singled out individual jurors and 
politely asked them questions about judging others and imposing the death sentence. He 
eventually made it to Miss Callie. “Now, Mrs. Ruffin, I’ve read about you, and you seem 
to be a very religious woman. Is this correct?” 

“I do love the Lord, yes sir,” she answered, as clear as always. 


“Are you hesitant to sit in judgment of another human?”
“I am, yes sir.”
“Do you want to be excused?”
“No sir. It’s my duty as a citizen to be here, same as all these other folks.”
“And if you’re on the jury, and the jury finds Mr. Padgitt guilty of these crimes, can you


vote to put him to death?”
“I certainly wouldn’t want to.”
“My question was, ‘Can you?’ “
“I can follow the law, same as these other folks. If the law says that we should consider


the death penalty, then I can follow the law.”


***


Four hours later, Calia H. Ruffin became the last juror chosen—the first black to serve on 
a trial jury in Ford County. The drunks up in the Bar Room had been right. The defense 
wanted her because she was black. The State wanted her because they knew her so well. 
Plus, Ernie Gaddis had to save his jury strikes for less-appealing characters. 

Late that night I sat alone in my office working on a story about the opening day and jury 
selection. I heard a familiar noise downstairs. Harry Rex had a way of shoving open the 
front door and stomping on the wooden floors so that everybody at the Times, regardless 
of the time of day, knew he had arrived. “Willie boy!” he yelled from below. 

“Up here,” I yelled back. 

He rumbled up the stairs and fell into his favorite chair. “Whatta you think of the jury?” 
he said. He appeared to be completely sober. 

“I only know one of them,” I said. “How many do you know?” 

“Seven.” 

“You think they picked Miss Callie because of my stories?” 


“Yep,” he said, brutally honest as always. “Everybody’s been talkin’ about her. Both 
sides felt like they knew her. It’s 1970 and we’ve never had a black juror. She looked as 
good as any. Does that worry you?” 

“I guess it does.” 

“Why? What’s wrong with servin’ on a jury? It’s about time we had blacks doin’ it. She 
and her husband have always been anxious to break down barriers. Ain’t like it’s 
dangerous. Well, normally it ain’t dangerous.” 

I hadn’t talked to Miss Callie and I would not be able to do so until after the trial. Judge 
Loopus had ordered the jurors sequestered for the week. By then they were hiding in a 
motel in another town. 

“Any suspicious characters on the jury?” I asked. 

“Maybe. Everybody’s worried about that crippled boy from out near Dumas. Fargarson. 
Hurt his back in a sawmill owned by his uncle. The uncle sold timber to the Padgitts 
many years ago. The boy has some attitude. Gaddis wanted to bump him but he ran out of 
challenges.” 

The crippled boy walked with a cane and was at least twenty-five years old. Harry Rex 
referred to anyone younger than himself, and especially me, as “boy.” 

“But with the Padgitts you never know,” he continued. “Hell, they could own half the 
jury by now.” 

“You don’t really believe that, do you?” 

“Naw, but a hung jury wouldn’t surprise me either. It might take two or three shots at this 
boy before Ernie gets him.” 

“But he will go to prison, won’t he?” The thought of Danny Padgitt escaping punishment 
frightened me. I had invested myself in the town of Clanton, and if its justice was so 
corruptible then I didn’t want to stay. 

“They’ll hang his ass.” 

“Good. The death penalty?” 

“I’d bet on it, eventually. This is the buckle of the Bible Belt, Willie. An eye for an eye, 
all that crap. Loopus’ll do everything he can to help Ernie get a death verdict.” 

I then made the mistake of asking him why he was working so late. A divorce client had 
left town on business, then sneaked back to catch his wife with her boyfriend. The client 


and Harry Rex had spent the last two hours in a borrowed pickup behind a hot-sheets 
motel north of town. As it turned out, the wife had two boyfriends. The story took half an 
hour to tell. 

Chapter 15 

Tuesday morning, almost two hours were wasted as the lawyers wrangled over some 
hotly contested motions back in the Judge’s chambers. “Probably the photographs,” 
Baggy kept saying. “They always fight over the photographs.” Since we were not privy to 
their little war, we waited impatiently in the courtroom, holding our seats. I wrote pages 
of useless notes in a chicken-scratch handwriting that any veteran reporter would admire. 
The scribbling kept me busy and it kept my eyes away from the ever-present stares of the 
Padgitts. With the jury out of the room they turned their attention to the spectators, 
especially me. 

The jurors were locked away in the deliberation room, with deputies at the door as if 
someone might gain something by attacking them. The room was on the second floor, 
with large windows that looked upon the east side of the courthouse lawn. At the bottom 
of one window was a noisy air-conditioning unit that could be heard from any point on 
the square when it was at full throttle. I thought of Miss Callie and her blood pressure. I 
knew she was reading the Bible and maybe this was calming her. I had called Esau early 
that morning. He was very upset that she had been sequestered and hauled away. 

Esau was in the back row, waiting with the rest of us. 

When Judge Loopus and the lawyers finally appeared they looked as though they had all 
been fistfighting. The Judge nodded at the bailiff and the jurors were led in. He 
welcomed them, thanked them, asked about their accommodations, apologized for the 
inconvenience, apologized for the delay that morning, then promised that things would 
move forward. 

Ernie Gaddis assumed a position behind the podium and began his opening statement to 
the jury. He had a yellow legal pad, but he didn’t look at it. With great efficiency, he 
rattled off the necessary elements the State would prove against Danny Padgitt. When all 
the exhibits were in, and all the witnesses were finished, and the lawyers were quiet, and 
the Judge had spoken, it would be left to the jury to serve justice. There was no doubt in 
his mind that they would find Danny Padgitt guilty of rape and murder. He didn’t waste a 
word, and every word found its mark. He was mercifully brief. His confident tone and 
concise remarks conveyed the clear message that he had the facts, the case, and he would 
get his verdict. He did not need long, emotional arguments to convince the jury. 

Baggy loved to say, “When lawyers have a weak case they do a lot more talking.” 


Oddly, Lucien Wilbanks deferred his opening remarks until the defense put on its case, 
an option rarely exercised. “He’s up to something,” Baggy mumbled as if he and Lucien 
were thinking together. “No surprise there.” 

The first witness for the State was Sheriff Coley himself. Part of his job was testifying in 
criminal cases, but it was doubtful he’d ever dreamed of doing so against a Padgitt. In a 
few months he would be up for reelection. It was important for him to look good before 
the voters. 

With Ernie’s meticulous planning and prodding, they walked through the crime. There 
were large diagrams of the Kassellaw home, the Deece home, the roads around Beech 
Hill, the exact spot where Danny Padgitt was arrested. There were photographs of the 
area. Then, there were photographs of Rhoda’s corpse, a series of eight by ten’s that were 
handed to the jurors and passed around. Their reactions were amazing. Every face was 
shocked. Some winced. A few mouths flew open. Miss Callie closed her eyes and 
appeared to pray. Another lady on the jury, Mrs. Barbara Baldwin, gasped at first sight 
and turned away. Then she looked at Danny Padgitt as if she could shoot him at pointblank range. “Oh my God,” one of the men mumbled. Another covered his mouth as if he 
might throw up. 

The jurors sat in padded swivel chairs that rocked slightly. As the gruesome photos were 
passed around, not a single chair was still. The pictures were inflammatory, highly 
prejudicial, yet always admissible, and as they caused a commotion in the jury box I 
thought Danny Padgitt was as good as dead. Judge Loopus allowed only six as exhibits. 
One would have sufficed. 

It was just after 1 P.M… and everyone needed a break. I doubted that the jurors had 
much of an appetite. 

*** 

The State’s second witness was one of Rhoda’s sisters from Missouri. Her name was 
Ginger McClure, and I had talked to her several times after the murder. When she 
realized I had gone to school at Syracuse and was not a native of Ford County, she had 
thawed somewhat. She had reluctantly sent me a photo for the obituary. Later, she had 
called and asked if I could send her copies of the Times when it mentioned Rhoda’s case. 
She expressed frustration in getting details from the District Attorney’s office. 

Ginger was a slim redhead, very attractive and well dressed, and when she settled into the 
witness chair she had everyone’s attention. 


According to Baggy, someone from the victim’s family always testified. Death became 
real when the loved ones took the stand and looked at the jurors. 

Ernie wanted Ginger to be viewed by the jury and arouse their sympathy. He also wanted 
to remind the jury that the mother of two small children had been taken from them in a 
premeditated murder. Her testimony was brief. Wisely, Lucien Wilbanks had no 
questions on cross-examination. When she was excused, she walked to a reserved chair 
behind the bar, near the seat of Ernie Gaddis, and assumed the position as representative 
of the family. Her every move was watched until the next witness was called. 

Then it was back to the gore. A forensic pathologist from the state crime lab was called to 
discuss the autopsy. Though he had plenty of photos, none were used. None were needed. 
In layman’s terms, her cause of death was obvious—a loss of blood. There was a fourinch gash beginning just below her left ear and running almost straight down. It was 
almost two inches deep, and, in his opinion, and he’d seen many knife wounds, it was 
caused by a rapid and powerful thrust from a blade that was approximately six inches 
long and an inch wide. The person using the knife was, more than likely, right-handed. 
The gash cut completely through the left jugular vein, and at that point the victim had 
only a few minutes to live. A second gash was six-and-a-half inches long, one inch deep, 
and ran from the tip of the chin and to the right ear, which it almost sliced in two. This 
wound by itself probably would not have resulted in death. 

The pathologist described these wounds as if he were talking about a tick bite. No big 
deal. Nothing unusual. In his business he saw this carnage every day and talked about it 
with juries. But for everyone else in the courtroom, the details were unsettling. At some 
point during his testimony, every single juror looked at Danny Padgitt and silently voted 
“Guilty.” 

Lucien Wilbanks began his cross pleasantly enough. The two had hooked up before in 
trials. He made the pathologist admit that some of his opinions might possibly be wrong, 
such as the size of the murder weapon and whether the assailant was right-handed. “I 
stated that these were probabilities,” the doctor said patiently. I got the impression that 
he’d been grilled so many times nothing rattled him. Wilbanks poked and probed a bit, 
but he was careful not to revisit the damning evidence. The jury had heard enough of the 
cuts and gashes; it would be foolish to cover this ground again. 

A second pathologist followed. Concurrent with the autopsy, he had made a thorough 
examination of the body and found several clues as to the identity of the killer. In the 
vaginal area, he found semen that matched perfectly with Danny Padgitt’s blood. Under 
the nail of Rhoda’s right index finger he had found a tiny piece of human skin. It too 
matched the defendant’s blood type. 

On cross-examination, Lucien Wilbanks asked him if he had personally examined Mr. 
Padgitt. No, he had not. Where on his body was Mr. Padgitt scraped or scratched or 
clawed in such a way? 


“I did not examine him,” the pathologist said. 

“Did you examine photographs of him?” 

“I did not.” 

“So if he lost some skin, you can’t tell the jury where it came from can you?” 

“I’m afraid not.” 

After four hours of graphic testimony, everybody in the courtroom was exhausted. Judge 
Loopus sent the jury away with stern warnings about avoiding outside contact. It seemed 
overkill in light of the fact that they were being hidden in another town and guarded by 
police. 

Baggy and I raced back to the office and typed frantically until almost ten. It was 
Tuesday, and Hardy liked to have the presses running no later than 11 P.M. On those rare 
weeks when there were no mechanical problems, he could run five thousand copies in 
less than three hours. 

Hardy set the type as quickly as possible. There was no time for editing and proofreading, 
but I wasn’t too concerned about that edition because Miss Callie was on the jury and 
wouldn’t be able to catch our mistakes. Baggy was hitting the sauce as we finished up 
and couldn’t wait to leave. I was about to head for my apartment when Ginger McClure 
strolled in the front door and said hello as if we were old friends. She was wearing tight 
jeans and a red blouse. She asked if I had anything to drink. Not at the office, but that 
wouldn’t stop us. 

We left the square in my Spitfire and drove to Quincy’s, where I bought a six-pack of 
Schlitz. She wanted to see Rhoda’s house one last time, from the road, not too close. As 
we headed that way I cautiously inquired about the two children. The report was mixed. 
Both were living with another sister—Ginger was quick to tell me she was recently 
divorced—and both were undergoing intense counseling. The little boy appeared to be 
almost normal, though he sometimes drifted off into prolonged periods of silence. The 
little girl was much worse. She had constant nightmares about her mother and had lost the 
ability to control her bladder. She was often found curled in a fetal position, sucking her 
fingers and groaning pitifully. The doctors were experimenting with various drugs. 

Neither child would tell the family or the doctors how much they saw that night. “They 
saw their mother get raped and stabbed,” she said, killing off the first beer. Mine was still 
half full. 

The Deece home looked as if Mr. and Mrs. Deece had been asleep for days. We turned 
into the gravel driveway of what was once the happy little Kassellaw home. It was empty, 
dark, and had an abandoned look to it. There was a FOR SALE sign in the yard. The 


house was the only significant asset in Rhoda’s small estate. The proceeds would all go to 
the children. 

At Ginger’s request, I cut the lights and turned off the engine. It was not a good idea 
because the neighbors were understandably jumpy. Plus, my Triumph Spitfire was the 
only one of its kind in Ford County and as such was naturally a suspicious vehicle. 

She gently placed her hand on mine and said, “How did he get in the house?” 

“They found some footprints at the patio door. It was probably unlocked.” And during a 
long silence both of us replayed the attack, the rape, the knife, the children fleeing 
through the darkness, yelling for Mr. Deece to come save their mother. 

“Were you close to her?” I asked, then I heard the distant approach of a vehicle. 

“When we were kids, but not recently. She left home ten years ago.” 

“How often did you visit here?” 

“Twice. I moved away too, to California. We sort of lost touch. After her husband died, 
we begged her to come back to Springfield, but she said she liked it here. Truth was, she 
and my mother never got along.” 

A pickup truck slowed on the road just behind us. I tried to act unconcerned, but I knew 
how dangerous things could be in such a dark part of the county. Ginger was staring at 
the house, lost in some horrible image, and seemed not to hear. Thankfully, the truck did 
not stop. 

“Let’s go,” she said, squeezing my hand. “I’m scared.” 

When we drove away, I saw Mr. Deece crouching in the shadows of his garage, holding a 
shotgun. He was scheduled to be the last witness called by the State. 

Ginger was staying at a local motel, but she did not want to go there. It was after 
midnight, our options were thin, so we drove to the Hocutt place, where I led her up the 
stairs, over the cats, and into my apartment. 

“Don’t get any ideas,” she said as she kicked off her shoes and sat on the sofa. “I’m not 
in the mood.” 

“Neither am I,” I lied. 

Her tone was almost flippant, as though her mood might change real soon and when it did 
then we could have a go at it. I was perfectly happy to wait. 


I found colder beer in the kitchen and we settled into our places as if we might talk until 
sunrise. “Tell me about your family,” she said. 

It was not my best subject, but, for this lady, I could talk. “I’m an only child. My mother 
died when I was thirteen. My father lives in Memphis, in an old family house that he 
never leaves because both he and the house have a few loose boards. He has an office in 
the attic, and he stays there all day and night trading stocks and bonds. I don’t know how 
well he trades, but I have a hunch he loses more than he gains. We speak by phone once a 
month.” 

“Are you wealthy?” 

“No, my grandmother is wealthy. My mother’s mother, BeeBee. She loaned me the 
money to buy the paper.” 

She thought about this as she sipped her beer. “There were three of us girls, two now. We 
were pretty wild growing up. My father went out for milk and eggs one night and never 
came home. My mother has tried twice more since then, can’t seem to get it right. I’m 
divorced. My older sister is divorced. Rhoda is dead.” She reached across with the bottle 
and tapped mine. “Here’s to a couple of screwed-up families.” 

We drank to that. 

Divorced, childless, wild, and very cute. I could spend time with Ginger. 

She wanted to know about Ford County and its characters—Lucien Wilbanks, the 
Padgitts, Sheriff Coley, and so on. I talked and talked and kept waiting for her mood to 
change. 

It did not. Sometime after 2 A.M. she stretched out on the sofa, and I went to bed alone. 

Chapter 16 

Three of the Hocutts—Max, Wilma, and Gilma—were loitering around the garage under 
my apartment when Ginger and I made our exit a few hours later. I guess they wanted to 
meet her. They looked at her scornfully as I made cheerful introductions. I half-expected 
Max to say something ridiculous like, “We did not contemplate illicit sex when we leased 
this place to you.” But nothing offensive was said, and we quickly drove to the office. 
She jumped in her car and disappeared. 

The latest edition was stacked floor to ceiling in the front room. I grabbed a copy for a 
quick perusal. The headline was fairly restrained—DANNY PADGITT TRIAL BEGINS: 


JURY SEQUESTERED. There were no photos of the defendant. We had used enough of 
those already, and I wanted to save a big one for the following week when, hopefully, we 
could nail the little thug leaving the courthouse after receiving his death sentence. Baggy 
and I had filled the columns with the things we’d seen and heard during the first two days, 
and I was quite proud of our reporting. It was straightforward, factual, detailed, well 
written, and not the least bit lurid. The trial itself was big enough to carry the moment. 
And, truthfully, I had already learned my lesson about trying to sensationalize things. By 
8 A.M. the courthouse and the square were blanketed with complimentary copies of the 
Times. 

*** 

There were no preliminary skirmishes on Wednesday morning. At precisely 9 A.M. the 
jurors were led in and Ernie Gaddis called his next witness. His name was Chub Brooner, 
the longtime investigator for the Sheriff’s department. According to both Baggy and 
Harry Rex, Brooner was famous for his incompetence. 

To wake up the jury and captivate the rest of us, Gaddis produced the bloody white shirt 
Danny Padgitt was wearing the night he was arrested. It had not been washed; the 
splotches of blood were dark brown. Ernie gently waved it around the courtroom for all 
to see as he chatted with Brooner. It had been removed from the body of Danny Padgitt 
by a deputy named Grice, in the presence of Brooner and Sheriff Coley. Tests had 
revealed two types of blood—O Positive and B Positive. Further tests by the state crime 
lab matched the B Positive with the blood of Rhoda Kassellaw. 

I watched Ginger as she looked at the shirt. After a few minutes she looked away and 
began writing something. Not surprisingly, she looked even better her second day in the 
courtroom. I was very concerned about her moods. 

The shirt was ripped across the front. Danny had cut himself when he crawled out of his 
wrecked truck and had received twelve stitches. Brooner did a passable job of explaining 
this to the jury. Ernie then pulled out an easel and placed on it two enlarged photographs 
of the footprints found on the patio of Rhoda’s home. On the exhibit table he picked up 
the shoes Padgitt was wearing when he arrived at the jail. Brooner stumbled through 
testimony that should have been much easier, but the point was made that everything 
matched. 

Brooner was terrified of Lucien Wilbanks and began stuttering at the first question. 
Lucien wisely ignored the fact that Rhoda’s blood was found on Danny’s shirt, and chose 
instead to hammer Brooner on the art and science of matching up footprints. The 
investigator’s training had not been comprehensive, he finally admitted. Lucien zeroed in 


on a series of ridges on the heel of the right shoe, and Brooner couldn’t locate them in the 
print. Because of weight and motion, a heel usually leaves a better print than the rest of 
the sole, according to Brooner’s testimony on direct. Lucien harangued him to the point 
of confusing everyone, and I had to admit that I was skeptical of the footprints. Not that it 
mattered. There was plenty of other evidence. 

“Was Mr. Padgitt wearing gloves when he was arrested?” Lucien asked.
“I don’t know. I didn’t arrest him.”
“Well, you boys took his shirt and his shoes. Did you take any gloves?”
“Not to my knowledge.”
“You’ve reviewed the entire evidence file, right, Mr. Brooner?”
“I have.”
“In fact, as chief investigator, you’re very familiar with every aspect of this case, aren’t


you?”
“Yes sir.”
“Have you seen any reference to any gloves worn by or taken from Mr. Padgitt?”
“No.”
“Good. Did you dust the crime scene for fingerprints?”
“Yes.”
“Routine, isn’t it?”
“Yes, always.”
“And of course you fingerprinted Mr. Padgitt when he was arrested, right?”
“Yes.”
“Good. How many of Mr. Padgitt’s fingerprints did you find at the crime scene?”
“None.”
“Not a single one, did you?”
“None.”



With that, Lucien picked a good moment to sit down. It was difficult to believe that the 
murderer could enter the house, hide there for a while, rape and murder his victim, then 
escape without leaving behind fingerprints. But Chub Brooner did not inspire a lot of 
confidence. With him in charge of the investigation, there seemed an excellent chance 
that dozens of fingerprints could have been missed. 

Judge Loopus called for the morning recess, and as the jurors stood to leave I made eye 
contact with Miss Callie. Her face exploded into one huge grin. She nodded, as if to say, 
“Don’t worry about me.” 

We stretched our legs and whispered about what we had just heard. I was delighted to see 
so many people in the courtroom reading the Times. I walked to the bar and leaned down 
to speak to Ginger. “You doin’ okay?” I asked. 

“I just want to go home,” she said softly. 

“How about lunch?” 

“You got it.” 

*** 

The State’s last witness was Mr. Aaron Deece. He walked to the stand shortly before 11 
A.M… and we braced for his recollection of that night. Ernie Gaddis led him through a 
series of questions designed to personalize Rhoda and her two children. They had lived 
next door for seven years, perfect neighbors, wonderful people. He missed them greatly, 
couldn’t believe they were gone. At one point Mr. Deece wiped a tear from his eye. 

This was completely irrelevant to the issues at hand, and Lucien gamely allowed it for a 
few minutes. Then he stood and politely said, “Your Honor, this is very touching, but it’s 
really not admissible.” 

“Move along, Mr. Gaddis,” Judge Loopus said. 

Mr. Deece described the night, the time, the temperature, the weather. He heard the 
panicked voice of little Michael, age five, calling his name, crying for help. He found the 
children outside, in their pajamas, wet with dew, in shock from fear. He took them inside 
where his wife put blankets on them. He got his shoes and his guns and was flying out of 
the house when he saw Rhoda, stumbling toward him. She was naked and, except for her 


face, she was completely covered in blood. He picked her up, carried her to the porch, 
placed her on a swing. 

Lucien was on his feet, waiting. 

“Did she say anything?” Ernie asked. 

“Your Honor, I object to this witness testifying to anything the victim said. It’s clearly 
heresay.” 

“Your motion is on file, Mr. Wilbanks. We’ve had our debate in chambers, and it is on 
the record. You may answer the question, Mr. Deece.” 

Mr. Deece swallowed hard, inhaled and exhaled, and looked at the jurors. “Two or three 
times, she said, ‘It was Danny Padgitt. It was Danny Padgitt.’ “ 

For dramatic effect, Ernie let those bullets crack through the air, then ricochet around the 
courtroom while he pretended to look at some notes. “You ever met Danny Padgitt, Mr. 
Deece?” 

“No sir.” 

“Had you ever heard his name before that night?” 

“No sir.” 

“Did she say anything else?” 

“The last thing she said was, ‘Take care of my babies.’ “ 

Ginger was touching her eyes with a tissue. Miss Callie was praying. Several of the jurors 
were looking at their feet. 

He finished his story—he called the Sheriff’s department; his wife had the children in a 
bedroom behind a locked door; he took a shower because he was covered with blood; the 
deputies showed up, did their investigating; the ambulance came and took away the body; 
he and his wife stayed with the children until around two in the morning, then rode with 
them to the hospital in Clanton. They stayed with them there until a relative arrived from 
Missouri. 

There was nothing in his testimony that could be challenged or impeached, so Lucien 
Wilbanks declined a cross-examination. The State rested, and we broke for lunch. I drove 
Ginger to Karaway, to the only Mexican place I knew, and we ate enchiladas under an 
oak tree and talked about everything but the trial. She was subdued and wanted to leave 
Ford County forever. 


I really wanted her to stay. 

*** 

Lucien Wilbanks began his defense with a little pep talk about what a nice young man 
Danny Padgitt really was. He had finished high school with good grades, he worked long 
hours in the family’s timber business, he dreamed of one day running his own company. 
He had no police record whatsoever. His only brush with the law had been one, just one, 
speeding ticket when he was sixteen years old. 

Lucien’s persuasive skills were reasonably well honed, but he was collapsing under the 
weight of the effort. It was impossible to make a Padgitt appear warm and cuddly. There 
was quite a bit of squirming in the courtroom, some smirks here and there. But we 
weren’t the ones deciding the case. Lucien was talking to the jurors, looking them in the 
eyes, and no one knew if he and his client had already locked up a vote or two. 

However, Danny was not a saint. Like most handsome young men he had discovered he 
enjoyed the company of ladies. He had met the wrong one, though, a woman who 
happened to be married to someone else. Danny was with her the night Rhoda Kassellaw 
was murdered. 

“Listen to me!” he bellowed at the jurors. “My client did not kill Miss Kassellaw! At the 
time of this horrible murder, he was with another woman, in her home not far from the 
Kassellaw place. He has an airtight alibi.” 

This announcement sucked the air out of the courtroom, and for a long minute we waited 
for the next surprise. Lucien played the drama perfectly. “This woman, his lover, will be 
our first witness,” he said. 

They brought her in moments after Lucien finished his opening remarks. Her name was 
Lydia Vince. I whispered to Baggy and he said he’d never heard of her; didn’t know any 
Vinces from out in Beech Hill. There were a lot of whispers in the courtroom as folks 
tried to place her, and gauging from the frowns and puzzled looks and head shakes it 
appeared as though the woman was a complete unknown. Lucien’s preliminary questions 
revealed that she was living in a rented house on Hurt Road back in March but was now 
living in Tupelo, that she and her husband were going through a divorce, that she had one 
child, that she grew up in Tyler County, and that she was currently unemployed. She was 
about thirty years old, somewhat attractive in a cheap way—short skirt, tight blouse over 
a big chest, bottle-blond hair—and she was utterly terrified of the proceedings. 


She and Danny had been having an adulterous affair for about a year. I glanced at Miss 
Callie and was not surprised to see this was not sitting well. 

On the night Rhoda was murdered, Danny was at her house. Malcolm Vince, her husband, 
was supposedly in Memphis, doing something with the boys, she really didn’t know what. 
He was gone a lot in those days. She and Danny had sex twice and sometime around 
midnight he was preparing to leave when her husband’s truck turned into the driveway. 
Danny sneaked out the rear door and disappeared. 

The shock of a married woman admitting in open court that she had committed adultery 
was designed to convince the jury that she had to be telling the truth. No one, respectable 
or otherwise, would admit this. It would damage her reputation, if she cared about such 
things. It would certainly impact her divorce, perhaps jeopardize custody of her child. It 
might even allow her husband to sue Danny Padgitt for alienation of affection, though it 
was doubtful the jurors were thinking that far ahead. 

Her answers to Lucien’s questions were brief and very well rehearsed. She refused to 
look at the jurors or at her alleged former lover. Instead, she kept her eyes down and 
appeared to be looking at Lucien’s shoes. Both the lawyer and the witness were careful 
not to venture outside the script. “She’s lyin’,” Baggy whispered loudly, and I agreed. 

When the direct examination was over, Ernie Gaddis stood and walked deliberately to the 
podium, staring with great suspicion at this self-confessed adulteress. He kept his reading 
glasses on the tip of his nose, and looked above them with wrinkled brow and narrow 
eyes. Very much the professor who’d just caught a bad student cheating. 

“Miss Vince, this house on Hurt Road. Who owned it?” 

“Jack Hagel.” 

“How long did you live there?” 

“About a year.” 

“Did you sign a lease?” 

She hesitated for a split second too long, then said, “Maybe my husband did. I really 
don’t remember.” 

“How much was the rent each month?” 

“Three hundred dollars.” 

Ernie wrote down each answer with great effort, as though each detail was about to be 
diligently investigated and lies would be revealed. 


“When did you leave this house?”
“I don’t know, about two months ago.”
“So how long did you live in Ford County?”
“I don’t know, a couple of years.”
“Did you ever register to vote in Ford County?”
“No.”
“Did your husband?”
“No.”
“What’s his name again?”
“Malcolm Vince.”
“Where does he live now?”
“I’m not sure. He moves around a lot. Last I heard he was somewhere around Tupelo.”
“And y’all are getting a divorce now, right?”
“Yes.”
“When did you file for divorce?”
Her eyes lifted quickly and she glanced at Lucien, who was listening hard but refusing to


watch her. “We haven’t actually filed papers yet,” she said.
“I’m sorry, I thought you said you were going through a divorce.”
“We’ve split, and we’ve both hired lawyers.”
“And who is your attorney?”
“Mr. Wilbanks.”
Lucien flinched, as if this was news to him. Ernie let it settle in, then continued, “Who is


your husband’s lawyer?”
“I can’t remember his name.”



“Is he suing you for divorce, or is it the other way around?”
“It’s a mutual thing.”
“How many other men were you sleeping with?”
‘Just Danny.”
“I see. And you live in Tupelo, right?”
“Right.”
“You say you’re unemployed, right?”
“For now.”
“And you’ve separated from your husband?”
“I just said we’ve split.”
“Where do you live over in Tupelo?”
“An apartment.”
“How much is the rent?”
“Two hundred a month.”
“And you live there with your child?”
“Yes.”
“Does the child work?”
“The child is five years old.”
“So how do you pay the rent and utilities?”
“I get by.” No one could have possibly believed her answer.
“What kind of car do you drive?”
She hesitated again. It was the kind of question that required an answer that could be


verified with a few phone calls. “A ‘68 Mustang.”
“That’s a nice car. When did you get it?”



Again, there was a paper trail here, and even Lydia, who wasn’t bright, could see the trap.
“Coupla months ago,” she said, defiantly.
“Is the car tided in your name?”
“It is.”
“Is the apartment lease in your name?”


“It is.”
Paperwork, paperwork. She couldn’t lie about it, and she certainly couldn’t afford it.
Ernie took some notes from Hank Hooten and studied them suspiciously.


“How long did you sleep with Danny Padgitt?”
“Fifteen minutes, usually.”
In a tense courtroom, the answer provided scattered laughter. Ernie removed his glasses,


rubbed them with the end of his tie, gave her a nasty grin, and rephrased the question.
“Your affair with Danny Padgitt, how long did it last?”
“Almost a year.”
“Where did you first meet him?”
“At the clubs, up at the state line.”


“Did someone introduce the two of you?”
“I really don’t remember. He was there, I was there, we had a dance. One thing led to
another.”


There was no doubt that Lydia Vince had spent many nights in many honky-tonks, and 
she’d never run from a new dance partner. Ernie needed just a few more lies that he could 
nail down. 

He asked a series of questions about her background and her husband’s—birth, education, 
marriage, employment, family. Names and dates and events that could be verified as true 
or false. She was for sale. The Padgitts had found a witness they could buy. 

As we left the courtroom late that afternoon, I was confused and uneasy. I had been 
convinced for many months that Danny Padgitt killed Rhoda Kassellaw, and I still had no 
doubts. But the jury suddenly had something to hang itself with. A sworn witness had 


committed a dreadful act of perjury, but it was possible that a juror could have a 
reasonable doubt. 

*** 

Ginger was more depressed than me, so we decided to get drunk. We bought burgers and 
fries and a case of beer and went to her small motel room where we ate and then drowned 
our fears and hatred of a corrupt judicial system. She said more than once that her family, 
fractured as it was, could not hold up if Danny Padgitt were let go. Her mother was not 
stable anyway, and a not-guilty verdict would push her over the cliff. What would they 
tell Rhoda’s children one day? 

We tried watching television, but nothing held our interest. We grew weary of worrying 
about the trial. As I was about to fall asleep, Ginger walked out of the bathroom naked, 
and the night took a turn for the better. We made love off and on until the alcohol 
prevailed and we fell asleep. 

Chapter 17 

Unknown to me—and there was no reason it should have been known to me because I 
was such a newcomer to the community and certainly not involved in judicial affairs, and 
besides I literally had my hands full of Ginger and for a few wonderful hours we lost 
interest in the trial—a secret meeting took place shortly after adjournment on Wednesday. 
Ernie Gaddis went to Harry Rex’s office for a post-trial drink and both admitted they 
were sick over Lydia’s testimony. They began making phone calls, and within an hour 
they had rounded up a group of lawyers they could trust, and a couple of politicians as 
well. 

The opinion was unanimous that the Padgitts were in the process of wiggling out of what 
appeared to be a solid case against them. They had managed to find a witness they could 
bribe. Lydia had obviously been paid to concoct her story, and she was either too broke 
or too stupid to understand the risks of perjury. Regardless, she had given the jury a 
reason, albeit a weak one, to second-guess the prosecution. 

An acquittal in such an open-and-shut case would infuriate the town and mock the court 
system. A hung jury would send a similar message—justice could be bought in Ford 
County. Ernie, Harry Rex, and the other lawyers worked hard every day manipulating the 


system on behalf of their clients, but the rules were applied fairly. The system worked 
because the judges and jurors were impartial and unbiased. To allow Lucien Wilbanks 
and the Padgitts to corrupt the process would cause irreparable damage. 

There was a consensus that a hung jury was entirely possible. As a believable witness, 
Lydia Vince left much to be desired, but the jurors were not as savvy about fabricated 
testimony and crooked clients. The lawyers agreed that Fargarson, “the crippled boy,” 
appeared hostile to the prosecution. After two full days and almost fifteen hours of 
watching the jurors, the lawyers felt they could read them. 

Mr. John Deere also had them worried. His real name was Mo Teale and he’d been a 
mechanic down at the tractor place for over twenty years. He was a simple man with a 
limited wardrobe. Late Monday afternoon when the jury was finally selected and Judge 
Loopus sent them home to hurriedly pack for the bus, Mo had simply loaded up his 
week’s supply of work uniforms. Each morning he marched into the jury box wearing a 
bright yellow shirt with green trim and green pants with yellow trim, as if he was ready 
for another vigorous day of pulling wrenches. 

Mo sat with his arms crossed and frowned whenever Ernie Gaddis was on his feet. His 
body language terrified the prosecution. 

Harry Rex thought it was important to find Lydia’s estranged husband. If they were in 
fact going through a divorce, it was more than likely not an amicable one. It was difficult 
to believe she was having an affair with Danny Padgitt, but at the same time it seemed 
likely that the woman was no stranger to extramarital activity. The husband might have 
testimony that could severely discredit Lydia’s. 

Ernie wanted to dig into her private life. He wanted to create doubt about her finances so 
he could yell at the jury, “How can she live so comfortably when she’s unemployed and 
going through a divorce?” 

“Because she got twenty-five thousand dollars from the Padgitts,” one of the lawyers said. 
Speculation about the amount of the bribe became a running debate as the night wore on. 

The search for Malcolm Vince began with Harry Rex and two others calling every lawyer 
within five counties. Around 10 P.M. they found a lawyer in Corinth, two hours away, 
who said he had met with a Malcolm Vince once about a divorce, but had not been 
retained. Mr. Vince was living in a trailer somewhere out in the boondocks near the 
Tishomingo County line. He could not remember where he worked, but he was sure he 
had written it down in his file at the office. The District Attorney himself got on the 
phone and coaxed the lawyer back to the office. 

At eight o’clock the next morning, about the time I was leaving Ginger at the motel, 
Judge Loopus readily agreed to order a subpoena for Malcolm Vince. Twenty minutes 
later, a Corinth city policeman stopped a forklift in a warehouse and informed its operator 


that a subpoena had just been issued for his appearance in a murder trial over in Ford 
County. 

“What the hell for?” Mr. Vince demanded. 

“I’m just following orders,” the policeman said. 

“What am I supposed to do?” 

“You got two choices, pal,” explained the cop. “Stay here with me till they come get you, 
or we can leave now and get it over with.” Malcolm’s boss told him to leave and hurry 
back. 

After a ninety-minute delay, the jury was brought in. Mr. John Deere was as spiffy as 
ever, but the rest were beginning to look tired. It seemed like the trial had been going on 
for a month. 

Miss Callie searched me out and gave me a restrained grin, not one of her spectacular 
day-brighteners. She was still clutching a small New Testament. 

Ernie rose and informed the court that he had no further questions for Lydia Vince. 
Lucien said he was through with her too. Ernie said he had a rebuttal witness he would 
like to call out of order. Lucien Wilbanks objected and they haggled over it at the bench. 
When Lucien learned who the witness was, he became visibly upset. A good sign. 

Evidently Judge Loopus was concerned about a bad verdict as well. He ruled against the 
defense, and a thoroughly bewildered Malcolm Vince was called into the packed 
courtroom to testify. Ernie had spent less than ten minutes with him in a back room, so he 
was as unprepared as he was confused. 

Ernie started slow, with the basics–name, address, employment, recent family history. 
Malcolm somewhat reluctantly admitted being married to Lydia and shared her desire to 
escape from the union. He said he had seen neither his wife nor his child in about a 
month. His recent employment history was spotty at best, but he tried to send her $50 a 
week to support the child. 

He knew she was unemployed but living in a nice apartment. “You’re not paying for her 
apartment?” Ernie asked with great suspicion, glancing warily at the jury. 

“No sir, I am not.” 

“Is her family paying for her apartment?” 

“Her family couldn’t pay for one night in a motel,” Malcolm said with no small amount 
of satisfaction. 


Once excused, Lydia had left the courtroom and was probably in the process of fleeing 
the country. Her act was complete, her performance over, her fee collected. She would 
never again set foot in Ford County. It’s doubtful her presence would have inhibited 
Malcolm’s testimony, but her absence gave him free rein to take all the cheap shots he 
wanted. 

“You’re not close to her family?” Ernie asked, a throwaway question.
“Most of them are in jail.”
“I see. She testified yesterday that a couple of months ago she bought a 1968 Ford


Mustang. Did you help her with this purchase?”
“I did not.”
“Any idea how this unemployed woman could make this purchase?” Ernie asked,


glancing at Danny Padgitt.
“No.”
“Do you know if she’s made any other unusual purchases lately?”
Malcolm looked at the jury, saw some friendly faces, and said, “Yeah, she bought a new


color television for herself and a new motorcycle for her brother.” 
It appeared as if everyone at the defense table had stopped breathing. The strategy over 
there had been to sneak Lydia in quietly, let her tell her lies, verify the alibi, get her off 

the stand, then push the case to a verdict before she could be discredited. She had known 
very few people in the county and now lived an hour away. 
The strategy was unraveling with disastrous results, and the entire courtroom could see 

and feel the tension between Lucien and his client.
“Do you know a man by the name of Danny Padgitt?” Ernie asked.
“Never heard of him,” Malcolm said.
“Your wife testified yesterday that she had been having an affair with him for almost a


year.”


It’s rare to see an unsuspecting husband confronted with such news in such a public
manner, but Malcolm seemed to handle it well. “That so?” he said.
“Yes sir. She testified the affair ended about two months ago.”
“Well, sir, I’ll tell you—that’s kinda hard to believe.”



“And why is that?”


Malcolm was squirming, suddenly interested in his feet. “Well, it’s really kinda personal,
you know,” he said.


“Yes, Mr. Vince, I’m sure it is. But sometimes personal matters have to be discussed in
open court. A man is on trial here, charged with murder. This is serious business, and we
need to know the truth.”


Malcolm swung his left leg over his right knee and scratched his chin for a few seconds.
“Well, sir, it’s like this. We stopped havin’ sex about two years ago. That’s why we’re
gettin’ a divorce, you know.”


“Any particular reason you stopped having sex?” Ernie asked as he held his breath.


“Yes sir. She told me she hated sex with me, said it made her sick to her stomach. Said
she preferred sex with, you know, other ladies.”


Though he knew what answer was coming, Ernie managed to appear sufficiently shocked.
Along with everyone else. He backed away from the podium and huddled with Hank
Hooten, just a brief break to allow the jurors to fully absorb the blow. Finally, he said,
“No further questions, Your Honor.”


***


Lucien approached Malcolm Vince as if he were staring at a loaded gun. He picked
around the edges for a few minutes. According to Baggy, a good trial lawyer never asks a
question unless he knows the answer, especially with a witness as dangerous as Malcolm
Vince. Lucien was a good lawyer, and he had no idea what Malcolm might blurt out.


He admitted he had no affection for Lydia, that he couldn’t wait to get through with the
divorce, that the last few years with her had not been pleasant, and so on. Typical divorce
chatter. He remembered hearing of the Kassellaw murder the next morning. He’d been
out the night before and returned home very late. Lucien scored a very weak point by
proving that Lydia was indeed alone that night, as she had testified.


But it mattered little. The jurors and the rest of us were still struggling with the enormity
of Lydia’s sins.



*** 

After a long recess, Lucien rose slowly and addressed the Court. “Your Honor, the 
defense has no other witnesses. However, my client wishes to testify. I want it stated 
clearly in the record that he will testify against my advice.” 

“Duly noted,” Loopus said. 

“A very stupid mistake. Unbelievable,” Baggy whispered loud enough for half the 
courtroom to hear. 

Danny Padgitt jumped up and strutted to the witness stand. His attempt at smiling came 
across as nothing but a smirk. His attempt at confidence came across as cockiness. He 
was sworn to tell the truth, but no one expected to hear it. 

“Why do you insist on testifying?” was Lucien’s first question, and the courtroom was 
still and silent. 

“Because I want these good people to hear what really happened,” he answered, looking 
at the jurors. 

“Then tell them,” Lucien said, waving his hand at the jury. 

His version of events was wonderfully creative because there was no one to rebut him. 
Lydia was gone, Rhoda was dead. He began by saying that he had spent a few hours with 
his girlfriend, Lydia Vince, who lived less than half a mile from Rhoda Kassellaw. He 
knew exactly where Rhoda lived because he had visited her on several occasions. She 
wanted a serious romance but he’d been too occupied with Lydia. Yes, he and Rhoda had 
had intimate relations on two occasions. They’d met at the clubs at the state line and 
spent many hours drinking and dancing. She was hot and loose and known to sleep 
around. 

As insult was added to injury, Ginger lowered her head and covered her ears. It was not 
missed by the jury. 

He didn’t believe Lydia’s husband’s garbage about her homosexual tendencies; the 
woman enjoyed the intimacy of men. Malcolm was lying so he could win custody of their 
child. 

Padgitt was not a bad witness, but then he was testifying for his life. Every answer was 
quick, there were too many fake smiles toward the jury box, his narrative was clean and 
neat and fit too nicely together. I listened to him and watched the jurors and I didn’t see 


much sympathy. Fargarson, the crippled boy, appeared just as skeptical as he had with 
every other witness. Mr. John Deere still sat with his arms wrapped across his chest, 
frowning. Miss Callie had no use for Padgitt, but then she would probably send him to 
prison for the adultery as quickly as for the murder. 

Lucien kept it brief. His client had plenty of rope with which to hang himself, no sense 
making it easier for the State. When Lucien sat down he glared at the elder Padgitts as if 
he truly hated them. Then he braced himself for what was about to come. 

Cross-examining such a guilty criminal is a prosecutor’s dream. Ernie deliberately 
walked to the exhibit table and lifted Danny’s bloody shirt. “Exhibit number eight,” he 
said to the court reporter, holding it up for the jury to see again. 

“Where’d you buy this shirt, Mr. Padgitt?” 

Danny froze, uncertain as to whether he should deny it was his, or admit ownership, or
try and recall where he bought the damned thing.
“You didn’t steal it, did you?” Ernie roared at him.
“I did not.”
“Then answer my question, and please try to remember you’re under oath. Where did you


buy this shirt?” As Ernie talked he held the shirt in front of him with his fingertips, as if
the blood was still wet and might spot his suit.
“Over in Tupelo, I think. I really don’t remember. It’s just a shirt.”
“How long have you owned it?”
Another pause. How many men can remember when they bought a particular shirt?


“A year or so, maybe. I don’t keep notes on clothes.”
“Neither do I,” Ernie said. “When you were in bed with Lydia that night, had you
removed this shirt?”


A very cautious, “Yes.”
“Where was it while the two of you were, uh, having relations?”
“On the floor, I guess.”
Now that it was firmly established that the shirt was his, Ernie was free to slaughter the


witness. He pulled out the report from the state crime lab, read it to Danny, and asked 
him how his own blood came to be stained on the shirt. This led to a discussion about his 


driving abilities, his tendency to speed, the type of vehicle, and the fact that he was 
legally drunk when he flipped his truck. With Ernie pounding away, I doubt if a case of 
driving under the influence had ever sounded so deadly. Not surprisingly, Danny had a 
thin skin and began to bristle at Ernie’s pointed and sardonic questioning. 

On to Rhoda’s bloodstains. If he was in bed with Lydia, with the shirt on the floor, how 
in the world did Rhoda’s blood find its way from her bedroom to Lydia’s, a half mile 
away? 

It was a conspiracy, Danny said, advancing a new theory and digging a hole he would 
never get out of. Too much time alone in a jail cell can be dangerous for a guilty criminal. 
Well, he tried to explain, someone either stained his shirt with Rhoda’s blood, a theory 
that lightened up the crowd considerably, or, it was more likely that some mysterious 
person who examined the shirt was simply lying, all in an effort to convict him. Ernie had 
a field day with both scenarios, but he landed his heaviest blows with a series of brutal 
questions about why Danny, who certainly had the money to hire the best lawyers around, 
didn’t hire his own expert to come to court and explain the tainted blood exams to the 
jury. 

Perhaps no expert was found because no expert could reach the ridiculous conclusions 
Padgitt wanted. 

Same for the semen. If Danny had been producing it over at Lydia’s, how could it arrive 
at Rhoda’s? No problem—it was part of a broad conspiracy to nail him for the crime. The 
lab reports were fabricated; the police work was faulty. Ernie hammered him until we 
were all exhausted. 

At twelve-thirty, Lucien stood and suggested a break for lunch. “I’m not done!” Ernie 
yelled across the courtroom. He wanted to finish the annihilation before Lucien could get 
his hands on his client and try to rehabilitate him, a task that seemed impossible. Padgitt 
was on the ropes, battered and gasping for air, and Ernie was not going to a neutral corner. 

“Continue,” Judge Loopus said, and Ernie suddenly shouted at Padgitt, “What did you do 
with the knife?” 

The question startled everyone, especially the witness, who jerked backward and quickly 
said, “I, uh,—” then went silent. 

“You what! Come on, Mr. Padgitt; tell us what you did with the knife, the murder 
weapon.” 

Danny shook his head fiercely and looked too scared to speak. “What knife?” he 
managed to say. He could not have looked guiltier if the knife had dropped out of his 
pocket onto the floor. 

“The knife you used on Rhoda Kassellaw.” 


“It wasn’t me.” 
Like a slow and cruel executioner, Ernie took a long pause and huddled with Hank 
Hooten again. He then picked up the autopsy report and asked Danny if he remembered 
the testimony of the first pathologist. Was his report also a part of this conspiracy? Danny 

wasn’t sure how to answer. All of the evidence was being used against him, so, yes, he 
figured it must be bogus as well. 
And the piece of his skin found under her fingernail, that was part of the conspiracy? And 

his own semen? And on and on; Ernie hammered away. Occasionally, Lucien would 

glance over his shoulder at Danny’s father with a look that said, “I told you so.” 
Danny’s presence on the stand allowed Ernie to once more trot out all the evidence, and 
the impact was devastating. His weak protests that everything was tainted by a conspiracy 
sounded ridiculous, even laughable. Watching him get thoroughly decimated before the 
jury was quite gratifying. The good guys were winning. The jury seemed primed to pull 
out rifles and form a firing squad. 

Ernie tossed his legal pad on his table and appeared ready for lunch, finally. He jammed 
both hands into his front pockets, glared at the witness, and said, “Under oath, you’re 
telling this jury you didn’t rape and murder Rhoda Kassellaw?” 

“I didn’t do it.”
“You didn’t follow her home from the state line that Saturday night?”
“No.”
“You didn’t sneak in her patio door?”
“No.”
“And hide in her closet until she put her children to bed?”
“No.”
“And you didn’t attack her when she came in to put on her night clothes?”
“No.”
Lucien stood and said angrily, “Objection, Your Honor, Mr. Gaddis is testifying here.”
“Overruled!” Loopus snapped at the defense table. The Judge wanted a fair trial. To


counteract all the lying done by the defense, the prosecution was being allowed 
considerable freedom in describing the murder scene. 


“You didn’t blindfold her with a scarf?”
Padgitt was continually shaking his head as the narrative approached its climax.
“And cut off her panties with your knife?”
“No.”
“And you didn’t rape her in her own bed, with her two little children asleep not far


away?” “I did not.”
“And you didn’t wake them with your noise?”
“No.”
Ernie walked as close to the witness chair as the Judge would allow, and he looked sadly


at his jury. Then he turned to Danny and said, “Michael and Teresa ran to check on their
mother, didn’t they, Mr. Padgitt?”
“I don’t know.”
“And they found you on top of her, didn’t they?”
“I wasn’t there.”
“Rhoda heard their voices, didn’t she? Did they yell at you, beg you to get off?”


“I wasn’t there.”
“And Rhoda did what any mother would do—she yelled for them to run, didn’t she, Mr.
Padgitt?”


“I wasn’t there.”
“You weren’t there!” Ernie bellowed, and the walls seemed to shake. “Your shirt was


there, your footprints were there, you left your semen there! You think this jury is stupid,
Mr. Padgitt?”
The witness kept shaking his head. Ernie walked slowly to his chair and pulled it from


under the table. As he was about to sit, he said, “You’re a rapist. You’re a murderer. And
you’re a liar, aren’t you, Mr. Padgitt?”
Lucien was up and yelling. “Objection, Your Honor. This is enough.”
“Sustained. Any further questions, Mr. Gaddis?”



“No, Your Honor, the State is finished with this witness.” 

“Any redirect, Mr. Wilbanks?” 

“No, Your Honor.” 

“The witness may step down.” Danny slowly got to his feet. Long gone was the smirk, 
the swagger. His face was red with anger and wet with sweat. 

As he was about to step out of the witness box and return to the defense table, he 
suddenly turned to the jury and said something that stunned the courtroom. His face 
wrinkled into pure hatred, and he jabbed his right index finger into the air. “You convict 
me,” he said, “and I’ll get every damned one of you.” 

“Bailiff!” Judge Loopus said as he grabbed for his gavel. “That’s enough, Mr. Padgitt.” 

“Every damned one of you!” Danny repeated, louder. Ernie jumped to his feet, but could 
think of nothing to say. And why should he? The defendant was strangling himself. 
Lucien was on his feet, equally uncertain about what to do. Two deputies raced forward 
and shoved Padgitt toward the defense table. As he walked away he glared at the jurors as 
if he might just throw a grenade right then. 

When things settled, I realized my heart was pounding with excitement. Even Baggy was 
too stunned to speak. 

“Let’s break for lunch,” His Honor said, and we fled the courtroom. I was no longer 
hungry. I felt like racing to my apartment and taking a shower. 

Chapter 18 

The trial resumed at 3 P.M. All the jurors were present; the Padgitts hadn’t knocked one 
off during lunch. Miss Callie gave me a grin, but her heart was not in it. 

Judge Loopus explained to the jury that it was now time for the closing arguments, after 
which he would read to them his formal instructions, and they should have the case to 
decide in a couple of hours or so. They listened carefully, but I’m sure they were still 
reeling from the shock of being so flagrantly intimidated. The entire town was reeling. 
The jurors were a sampling of us, the rest of the community, and to threaten them was to 
do the same to everyone. 


Ernie went first, and within minutes the bloody shirt was back in play. He was careful, 
though, not to overdo it. The jurors understood. They knew the evidence well. 

The District Attorney was thorough but surprisingly brief. As he made his last appeal for 
a verdict of guilty, we watched the faces of the jurors. I saw no sympathy for the 
defendant. Fargarson, the crippled boy, was actually nodding as he followed along with 
Ernie. Mr. John Deere had uncrossed his arms and was listening to every word. 

Lucien was even briefer, but then he had far less to work with. He began by addressing 
his client’s final words to the jury. He apologized for his behavior. He blamed it on the 
pressure of the moment. Imagine, he asked the jurors, being twenty-four years old and 
facing either life in prison or, worse, the gas chamber. The stress on his young client—he 
always referred to him as “Danny” as if he was an innocent little boy—was so enormous 
that he was concerned about his mental stability. 

Since he could not pursue the goofy conspiracy theory advanced by his client, and since 
he knew better than to dwell on the evidence, he spent half an hour or so praising the 
heroes who’d written our Constitution and the Bill of Rights. The way Lucien interpreted 
the presumption of innocence and the requirement that the State prove its case beyond a 
reasonable doubt made me wonder how any criminal ever got convicted. 

The State had the chance for a rebuttal; the defense did not. So Ernie got the last word. 
He ignored the evidence and did not mention the defendant, but chose instead to talk 
about Rhoda. Her youth and beauty, her simple life out in Beech Hill, the death of her 
husband, and the challenge of raising two small children alone. 

This was very effective, and the jurors were absorbing every word. “Let’s not forget 
about her,” was Ernie’s refrain. A polished orator, he saved the best for last. 

“And let’s not forget about her children,” he said as he looked into the eyes of the jurors. 
“They were there when she died. What they saw was so horrible that they will be forever 
scarred. They have a voice here in this courtroom, and their voice belongs to you.” 

Judge Loopus read his instructions to the jury, then sent them back to begin their 
deliberations. It was after 5 P.M… a time when the shops around the square were closed 
and the merchants and their customers were long gone. Traffic was normally light, 
parking was easy. 

But not when a jury is out! 

Much of the crowd lingered on the courthouse lawn, smoking, gossiping, predicting how 
long a verdict would take. Others crowded into the cafes for a late coffee or an early 
dinner. Ginger followed me to my office where we sat on the balcony and watched the 
activity around the courthouse. She was emotionally wasted and wanted to do nothing but 
get out of Ford County. 


“How well do you know Hank Hooten?” she asked at one point.
“Never met him. Why?”
“He caught me during lunch, said he knew Rhoda well, said he knew for a fact that she


was not sleeping around, especially not with Danny Padgitt. I told him I did not believe
for an instant that she was seeing that scumbag.”


“Did he say he dated her?” I asked.
“He wouldn’t say, but I got the impression he did. When we were going through her
things, a week or so after the funeral, I found his name and phone number in her address
book.”


“You’ve met Baggy,” I said.
“Yes.”
“Well, Baggy’s been around forever, thinks he knows it all. He told me Monday when the


trial started that Rhoda and Hank were seeing each other. He said Hank’s been through a
couple of wives, likes to be known as a ladies’ man.”
“So he’s not married?”
“I don’t think so. I’ll ask Baggy.”
“I guess I should feel better knowing my sister was sleeping with a lawyer.”
“Why would that make you feel better?”


“I don’t know.”
She’d kicked off her heels and her short skirt was even higher up her thighs. I began to
rub them, and my thoughts drifted away from the trial.


But only for a moment. There was a commotion around the front door of the courthouse, 
and I heard someone yell something about a “verdict.” 

*** 


After deliberating for less than one hour, the jury was ready. When the lawyers and 
spectators were in place, Judge Loopus told a bailiff, “Bring ‘em in.” 

“Guilty as hell,” Baggy whispered to me as the door opened and Fargarson came limping 
out first. “Quick verdicts are always guilty.” 

For the record, Baggy had predicted a hung jury, but I didn’t remind him of that, not then 
anyway. 

The foreman handed a folded sheet of paper to the bailiff, who then gave it to the Judge. 
Loopus examined it for a long time, then leaned down close to his microphone. “Would 
the defendant please rise,” he said. Both Padgitt and Lucien stood, slowly and awkwardly, 
as if the firing squad was taking aim. 

Judge Loopus read, “As to count one, the charge of rape, we the jury find the defendant, 
Danny Padgitt, guilty. As to count two, the charge of capital murder, we the jury find the 
defendant, Danny Padgitt, guilty.” 

Lucien didn’t flinch and Padgitt tried not to. He looked at the jurors with as much venom 
as he could convey, but he was getting more of it in return. 

“You may be seated,” His Honor said, then turned to the jury. “Ladies and gentlemen, 
thank you for your service so far. This completes the guilt-or-innocence phase of the trial. 
Now we move to the capital phase in which you will be asked to decide whether this 
defendant gets a death sentence or life in prison. You will now return to your hotel, and 
we will recess until nine in the morning. Thank you and good night.” 

It was over so quickly that most of the spectators didn’t move for a moment. They led 
Padgitt out, in handcuffs this time, and his family seemed completely bewildered. Lucien 
had no time to chat with them. 

Baggy and I went to the office where he began typing with a fury. The deadline was days 
away, but we wanted to capture the moment. Typically, though, he faded after half an 
hour when the sour mash called. It was almost dark when Ginger returned, in tight jeans, 
tight shirt, hair down, a look that said “Take me somewhere.” 

We stopped at Quincy’s again, where I bought another six-pack for the road, and with the 
top down and the warm muggy air blowing by us, we headed for Memphis, ninety 
minutes away. 

She said little, and I didn’t poke around. She had been forced by her family to attend the 
trial. She hadn’t asked for this nightmare. Luckily, she’d found me for a little fun. 

I’ll never forget that night. Racing the dark empty backroads, drinking a cold beer, 
holding hands with a beautiful lady who’d come looking for me, one I’d already slept 
with and was sure to do so again. 


Our sweet little romance had but a few hours left. I could almost count them. Baggy 
thought the penalty phase would take less than a day, so the trial would end tomorrow, 
Friday. Ginger couldn’t wait to leave Clanton and shake the dust off her shoes, and of 
course there was no way I could leave with her. I’d checked an atlas—Springfield, 
Missouri, was far away, at least a six-hour drive. Commuting would be difficult, though 
I’d certainly try if she wanted me to. 

But something told me Ginger would vanish from my life as quickly as she had appeared. 
I was sure she had a boyfriend or two back home, so I wouldn’t be welcome. And if she 
saw me in Springfield she would be reminded of Ford County and its horrible memories. 

I squeezed her hand and vowed to make the most of those last few hours. 

In Memphis, we headed for the tall buildings by the river. The most famous restaurant in 
town was a rib place called the Rendezvous, a landmark owned by a family of Greeks. 
Almost all of the good food in Memphis was cooked by either Greeks or Italians. 

Downtown Memphis in 1970 was not a safe place. I parked in a garage and we hustled 
across an alley to the door of the Rendezvous. Smoke from its pits boiled from vents and 
hung like thick fog among the buildings. It was the most delicious smell I had ever 
encountered, and I, like most other patrons, was famished by the time we walked down a 
flight of stairs and entered the restaurant. 

Thursdays were slow. We waited five minutes, and when they called my name we 
followed a waiter as he zigzagged around tables, through smaller rooms, deeper into the 
caverns. He winked at me and gave us a table for two in a dark corner. We ordered ribs 
and beer and groped each other while we waited. 

The guilty verdict was a huge relief. Anything else would’ve been a civic disaster, and 
Ginger would’ve fled town and never looked back. She would flee tomorrow, but I had 
her for the moment. We drank to the verdict. For Ginger it meant justice had indeed 
prevailed. For me, it meant that too, but it also gave us another night together. 

She ate little, which allowed me to finish my slab of ribs and go to work on hers. I told 
her about Miss Callie and the lunches on her porch, about her remarkable children, and 
her background. Ginger said she adored Miss Callie, same as she adored the other eleven. 

Such admiration would not last long. 

*** 


As I had expected, my father was holed up in the attic, which is what he had always 
called his office. It was really the top floor of a Victorian tower at the front corner of our 
shabby and ill-maintained home in mid-town Memphis. Ginger wanted to see it, and in 
the darkness it looked much more imposing than in daylight. It was in a wonderful, shady 
old neighborhood filled with declining homes owned by declining families surviving 
gamely in genteel poverty. 

“What does he do up there?” she asked. We were sitting in my car, with the engine off, at 
the curb. Mrs. Duckworth’s ancient schnauzer was barking at us four doors down. 

“I told you already. He trades stocks and bonds.” 

“At night?” 

“He’s doing market research. He never comes out.” 

“And he loses money?” 

“He certainly doesn’t make any.” 

“Are we going to say hello?” 

“No. It’ll just piss him off.” 

“When was the last time you saw him?” 

“Three, four months ago.” Visiting with my father was the last thing I wanted to do at 
that moment. I was consumed with lust and anxious to get started. We drove out of the 
city, into the suburbs, and found a Holiday Inn next to the interstate. 

Chapter 19 

Friday morning, in the hallway outside the courtroom, Esau Ruffin found me and had a 
pleasant surprise. Three of his sons, Al, Max, and Bobby (Alberto, Massimo, and 
Roberto), were with him, anxious to say hello to me. I had spoken to all three a month 
earlier when I was doing the feature on Miss Callie and her children. We shook hands 
and exchanged pleasantries. They politely thanked me for my friendship with their 
mother, and for the kind words I’d written about their family. They were as soft-spoken, 
pleasant, and as articulate as Miss Callie. 


They had arrived late the night before to give her moral support. Esau had talked to her 
once all week—each juror had been given one phone call—and she was holding up well 
but worried about her blood pressure. 

We chatted for a moment as the crowd pushed toward the courtroom and walked in 
together. They sat directly behind me. A few moments later when Miss Callie took her 
seat, she looked at me and saw her three sons. The smile was like a bolt of lightning. The 
fatigue around her eyes vanished immediately. 

During the trial, I had seen in her face a certain amount of pride. She was sitting where no 
black person had ever sat, shoulder to shoulder with fellow citizens, judging a white 
person for the first time in Ford County. I’d also had hints of the anxiety that comes with 
venturing into untested waters. 

Now that her sons were there to watch, pride filled her face, and there was no evidence of 
fear. She sat a bit straighter, and though she’d missed nothing in the courtroom so far, her 
eyes darted everywhere, anxious to capture what was coming and finish her task. 

Judge Loopus explained to the jurors that in the penalty phase the State would offer 
evidence of aggravating circumstances in support of its request for the death penalty. The 
defense would offer mitigating proof. He did not expect it to take long. It was Friday; the 
trial had already lasted forever; the jurors and everybody else in Clanton wanted Padgitt 
shipped off so life could return to normal. 

Ernie Gaddis correctly gauged the mood in the courtroom. He thanked the jurors for their 
proper verdict of guilty and confessed that he felt no further testimony was necessary. 
The crime was so heinous that nothing more aggravating could be added to it. He asked 
the jurors to remember the graphic photos of Rhoda in the swing on Mr. Deece’s front 
porch, and the pathologist’s testimony about her vicious wounds and how she died. And 
her children, please don’t forget her children. 

As if anybody could. 

He delivered an impassioned plea for the death penalty. He gave a brief history of why 
we, as good solid Americans, believed so strongly in it. He explained why it was a 
deterrent and a punishment. He quoted Scripture. 

In almost thirty years of prosecuting crimes in six counties, he had never seen a case that 
so mightily begged for the death penalty. Watching the faces of the jurors, I was 
convinced he was about to get what he asked for. 

He wrapped it up by reminding the jurors that each had been selected on Monday after 
promising that they could follow the law. He read them the law enacting the death 
penalty. “The State of Mississippi has proven its case,” he said, closing the thick green 
law book. “You have found Danny Padgitt guilty of rape and murder. The law now calls 
for the death penalty. You are duty bound to deliver it.” 


Ernie’s spellbinding performance lasted for fifty-one minutes—I was trying to record 
everything—and when he finished I knew the jury would hang Padgitt not once but twice. 

According to Baggy, in a capital case the defendant, after protesting his innocence 
throughout the trial and being nailed by the jury, usually took the stand and said he was 
very sorry for whatever crime he’d been denying all week. “They beg and cry,” Baggy 
had said. “It’s quite a show.” 

But Padgitt’s disaster the day before precluded him from getting near the jury. Lucien 
called to the witness stand his mother, Lettie Padgitt. She was a fiftyish woman with 
pleasant features and short graying hair, and she wore a black dress as if she was already 
mourning the death of her son. Led by Lucien, she unsteadily began testimony that 
seemed scripted down to every pause in her cadence. There was Danny the little boy, 
fishing every day after school, breaking his leg falling from a tree house, and winning the 
spelling bee in the fourth grade. He was never any trouble in those days, none at all. In 
fact, Danny had caused no trouble at all growing up, a real joy. His two older brothers 
were always into something, but not Danny. 

The testimony was so silly and self serving that it bordered on ridiculous. But there were 
three mothers on the jury—Miss Callie, Mrs. Barbara Baldwin, and Maxine Root—and 
Lucien was aiming for one of them. He needed just one. 

Not surprisingly, Mrs. Padgitt was soon in tears. She would never believe that her son 
had committed such a terrible crime, but if the jury felt so, then she would try and accept 
it. But why take him away? Why kill her little boy? What would the world gain if he 
were put to death? 

Her pain was real. Her emotions were raw and difficult to watch, to sit through. Any 
human being would feel sympathy for a mother about to lose a child. She finally 
collapsed and Lucien left her sobbing on the witness stand. What began as a stilted 
performance ended in a gut-wrenching plea that forced most of the jurors to lower their 
eyes and study the floor. 

Lucien said he had no other witnesses. He and Ernie made brief final summations, and by 
11 A.M. the jury once again had the case. 

*** 

Ginger disappeared into the crowd. I went to the office and waited, and when she didn’t 
show I walked across the square to Harry Rex’s office. He sent his secretary out for 


sandwiches and we ate in his cluttered conference room. Like most lawyers in Clanton, 
he’d spent the entire week in the courtroom watching a case that meant nothing to him 
financially. 

“Is your gal gonna stick?” he asked with a mouth full of turkey and Swiss.
“Miss Callie?” I asked.
“Yeah. She okay with the gas chamber?”
“I have no idea. We haven’t discussed it.”
“She’s got us worried, along with that damned crippled boy.”
Harry Rex had quietly involved himself in the case in such a way that one would think he


was working for Ernie Gaddis and the State. But he wasn’t the only lawyer in town
secretly abetting the prosecution.
“It took them less than sixty minutes to find him guilty,” I said. “Isn’t that a good sign?”


“Maybe, but jurors do strange things when it’s time to sign a death warrant.”
“So? Then he’ll get life. From what I hear about Parchman, life there would be worse
than the gas chamber.”


“Life ain’t life, Willie,” he said, wiping his face with a paper towel.
I put my sandwich down while he took another bite.
“What is life?” I asked.
“Ten years, maybe less.”
I tried to understand this. “You mean a life sentence in Mississippi is ten years?”
“You got it. After ten years, less with good time, a murderer sent to prison for life is


eligible for parole. Insane, don’t you think?”
“But why—”
“Don’t try and understand it, Willie, it’s just the law. Been on the books for fifty years.


And what’s worse is the jury doesn’t know it. Can’t tell ‘em. Want some coleslaw?”
I shook my head.



“Our distinguished Supreme Court has said that the jury, if it knows how light a life 
sentence really is, might be more inclined to give the death penalty. Thus, it’s unfair to 
the defendant.” 

“Life is ten years,” I mumbled to myself. In Mississippi, the liquor stores are locked up 
on Election Day, as if the voters would otherwise get drunk and elect the wrong people. 
Another unbelievable law. 

“You got it,” Harry Rex said, then finished his sandwich with one huge bite. He pulled an 
envelope off a shelf, opened it, then slid a large black-and-white photo across to me. 
“Busted, buddy,” he said with a laugh. 

It was a photo of me, making my quick exit from Ginger’s room at the motel on Thursday 
morning. I looked tired, hungover, guilty of something, but also oddly satisfied. 

“Who took this?” I asked. 

“One of my boys. He was working on a divorce case, saw your little Communist car pull 
in that night, decided to have some fun.” 

“He wasn’t the only one.” 

“She’s a hot one. He tried to shoot through the curtains, but couldn’t get an angle.” 

“Shall I autograph it for you?” 

“Just keep it.” 

*** 

After three hours of deliberation, the jury slipped a note to Judge Loopus. They were 
deadlocked and making little progress. He called things to order, and we raced across the 
street. 

If the jury could not reach a unanimous verdict for the death penalty, then, by law, the 
judge imposed a life sentence. 

Fear pervaded the crowd as we waited for the jurors. Something was going wrong back 
there. Had the Padgitts finally found their mark? 


Miss Callie was stonefaced, a look I’d never seen. Mrs. Barbara Baldwin had obviously 
been crying. Several of the men gave the impression that their fistfight had just been 
broken up, and that they were anxious to resume the brawl. 

The foreman stood and very nervously explained to His Honor that the jury was divided 
and had made absolutely no progress in the last hour. He was not optimistic about a 
unanimous verdict, and all were ready to go home. 

Judge Loopus then asked each juror if he or she thought a unanimous verdict could be 
reached. They unanimously said no. 

I could feel the anger rise among the crowd. People were fidgeting and whispering, and 
this certainly didn’t help the jurors. 

Judge Loopus then delivered what Baggy later described as the “dynamite charge,” an 
off-the-cuff lecture about following the law and keeping promises made during jury 
selection. It was a stern and lengthy admonishment, loaded with no small measure of 
desperation. 

It didn’t work. Two hours later, a stunned courtroom listened as Judge Loopus quizzed 
the jurors again, with the same result. He grudgingly thanked them and sent them home. 

When they were gone, he called Danny Padgitt forward, and on the record, gave him a 
tongue lashing that made my skin crawl. He called him a rapist, murderer, coward, liar, 
and worst of all a thief for having taken from two small children the only parent they had. 
It was a scalding, withering assault. I tried to write it word for word, but it was so 
compelling I had to stop and listen. A rabid street preacher could not have heaped such 
abuse upon sin. 

If he had the power, he would sentence him to death, and a rapid and painful one at that. 

But the law was the law, and he had to follow it. He sentenced him to life and ordered 
Sheriff Coley to immediately transport him to the state penitentiary at Parchman. Coley 
slapped handcuffs on him and he was gone. 

Loopus banged his gavel and bolted from the courtroom. A fight erupted in the back of 
the courtroom when one of Danny’s uncles bumped into Doc Crull, a local barber and 
noted hothead. It quickly drew a crowd and several others cursed the Padgitts and told 
them to get back to their island. “Go back to your swamp!” someone kept yelling. 
Deputies broke it up, and the Padgitts left the courtroom. 

The crowd lingered for a while, as if the trial weren’t finished, as if justice had not been 
completely served. There was anger and cursing, and I got a whiff of how lynch mobs got 
organized. 


*** 

Ginger didn’t show. She said she would stop by the office after she checked out and say 
good-bye, but she obviously changed her mind. I could see her speeding through the 
night, crying and cursing and counting the miles until she was out of Mississippi. Who 
could blame her? 

Our three-day fling came to an abrupt end the way both of us expected but neither had 
admitted. I could not imagine our paths ever crossing again, and if they did it would be 
another round or two in the sack before we got distracted with life and moved on. She 
would go through many men before she found one who would last. I sat on the porch 
outside my office and waited for her to park below, knowing she was probably in 
Arkansas by then. We’d started the day in bed together, anxious to return to court to 
watch her sister’s murderer get his death sentence. 

In the heat of the moment, I began writing an editorial about the verdict. It would be a 
scathing attack on the criminal laws of the State. It would be honest and heartfelt, and it 
would also play well with the audience. 

Esau called and interrupted me. He was at the hospital with Miss Callie and asked me to 
hurry down. 

She had fainted as she was getting into the car outside the courthouse. Esau and the three 
sons had rushed her in, and wisely so. Her blood pressure was dangerously high, and the 
doctor was worried about a stroke. After a couple of hours, though, she had stabilized and 
her outlook was better. I held her hand briefly, told her I was very proud of her, and so on. 
What I really wanted was the inside story on what happened back in the jury room. 

It was a story I would never get. 

I drank coffee with Al, Max, Bobby, and Esau until midnight in the hospital canteen. She 
had not said a word about the jury’s deliberations. 

We talked about them and their brothers and sisters, and their children and careers and 
life growing up in Clanton. The stories poured forth, and I almost pulled out a pen and 
notepad. 

Chapter 20 


For the first six months I lived in Clanton, I usually fled the place on weekends. There 
was so little to do. Other than an occasional goat roasting at Harry Rex’s, and one 
dreadful cocktail party, which I left twenty minutes after I arrived, there had been no 
socializing. Virtually all the young people my age were married, and their idea of a 
blowout was an ice cream “supper” on Saturday night at one of the innumerable churches 
in town. Most of those who went away to college never came back. 

Out of boredom, I occasionally spent the weekends in Memphis, usually at the apartment 
of a friend, almost never at home. I made several trips to New Orleans where an old 
girlfriend from high school was living and enjoying the party life. But the Times was 
mine for the near future anyway. I was a resident of Clanton. I had to come to grips with 
life in a small town, dull weekends and all. The office became my refuge. 

I went there on Saturday after the verdict, around noon. I had several stories about the 
trial I wanted to write, plus my editorial was far from finished. There were seven letters 
lying on the floor, just inside the front door. This had been a tradition at the Times for 
many years. On those rare occasions when Spot wrote something that prompted a 
reaction from a reader, more often than not the letter to the editor was hand-delivered and 
slid under the front door. 

Four were signed, three were anonymous. Two were typed, the rest handwritten, one I 
could hardly read. All seven expressed outrage that Danny Padgitt had escaped with his 
life. I was not surprised by the town’s thirst for blood. I was also dismayed that six of the 
seven made some reference to Miss Callie. The first one was typed and unsigned. It read: 

Dear Editor: 

Our community has sunk to a new low when an outlaw like Danny Padgitt can rape and 
murder and get by with it. The presence of a Negro on the jury should wake us up to the 
fact that these people do not think the way law-abiding white people think. 

Mrs. Edith Caravelle from Beech Hill, in a beautiful hand, wrote: 

Dear Editor: 


I live one mile from where the murder took place. I am the mother of two teenagers. How 
do I explain the verdict to them? The Bible says: “An eye for an eye.” I guess that doesn’t 
apply to Ford County. 

Another anonymous author wrote, on perfumed pink stationery with flowers around the 
border: 

Dear Editor: 

See what happens when blacks are placed in positions of responsibility. An all-white jury 
would have strung up Padgitt in the courtroom. Now the Supreme Court is telling us that 
blacks should teach our children, police our streets, and run for public office. God help us. 

As the editor (and owner and publisher) I had complete control over what was printed in 
the Times. I could edit the letters, ignore them, pick and choose the ones I wanted to print. 
On controversial issues and events, letters to the editor stoked the fires and got folks 
upset. And they sold newspapers, because that’s the only place they could be printed. 
They were absolutely free and allowed anyone the forum to sound off. 

As I read the first wave, I decided that I would print nothing that would harm Miss Callie. 
And I became angry that people were assuming she had somehow hung the jury and 
prevented a death sentence. 

Why was the town so anxious to blame an unpopular verdict on the only black on the jury? 
And with no proof whatsover? I vowed to find out what really happened in the jury room, 
and I immediately thought of Harry Rex. Baggy, of course, would stumble in Monday 
morning with his customary hangover and pretend to know exactly how the jury split 
Odds were he’d be wrong. If anyone could get to the truth, it would be Harry Rex. 

Wiley Meek stopped by with the town gossip. Folks were hot in the coffee shops. Padgitt 
was a dirty word. Lucien Wilbanks was despised, but that was nothing new. Sheriff 
Coley might as well retire; he wouldn’t get fifty votes. Two opponents were already 
making noise and the election was half a year away. 


One story had eleven voting for the gas chamber and one holding out. “Probably the 
nigger,” someone had said, echoing the prevailing sentiment at the Tea Shoppe around 
seven that morning. A deputy guarding the jury room allegedly whispered to someone 
somebody knew that it was a six-six split, but this was widely discounted around nine 
o’clock at the coffee shops. There were two primary theories roaring around the square 
that morning: first, Miss Callie had screwed things up simply because she was black; 
second, the Padgitts had dropped some cash on two or three of the jurors, same as they 
had done on that “lyin’ bitch,” Lydia Vince. 

Wiley thought the second had more supporters than the first, though many seemed 
perfectly willing to believe anything. I was learning that coffee shop gossip was useless. 

*** 

Late Saturday afternoon, I crossed the tracks and drove slowly through Lowtown. The 
streets were alive with kids on bikes, pickup basketball games, crowded porches, music 
from the open doors of the honky-tonks, laughter from the men in front of the stores. 
Everyone was outside, sort of limbering up for the rigors of Saturday night. People waved 
and stared, more amused at my little car than my pale skin. 

There was a crowd on Miss Callie’s porch. Al, Max, and Bobby were there along with 
Reverend Thurston Small and another well-dressed deacon from the church. Esau was in 
the house tending to his wife. She had been discharged that morning with strict 
instructions to stay in bed for three days and not lift a finger. Max led me back to her 
bedroom. 

She was sitting in bed, propped up with pillows, reading the Bible. She flashed a smile 
when she saw me, and said, “Mr. Traynor, so nice of you to come. Please sit. Esau, fetch 
Mr. Traynor some tea.” Esau, as always, jumped when she gave orders. 

I sat in a stiff wooden chair close to her bed. She did not appear to be the least bit ill to 
me. “I’m really concerned about lunch next Thursday,” I began, and we laughed. 

“I’m cooking,” she said. 

“No you’re not. I have a better idea. I’ll bring the food.” 

“Why does that worry me?” 

“I’ll buy it somewhere. Something a bit lighter, like a sandwich.” 


“A sandwich will be fine,” she said, patting my knee. “My tomatoes will be ready 
shortly.” 

She stopped patting and smiling and looked away for a moment. “We didn’t do a good 
job, did we, Mr. Traynor?” Her words were filled with both sadness and frustration. 

“It’s not a popular verdict,” I said. 

“It’s not what I wanted,” she said. 

And that was as close to the deliberations as she would get for many years. Esau told me 
later that the other eleven jurors had sworn on a Bible not to talk about their decision. 
Miss Callie wouldn’t swear on the Bible, but she gave them her word that she would 
guard their secrets. 

I left her there to rest and went to the porch, where I spent several hours listening to her 
sons and their guests talk about life. I sat in a corner, sipping tea, trying to keep myself 
out of their conversations. At times I would drift away and absorb the sounds of 
Lowtown on a Saturday night. 

The reverend and the deacon left, leaving only Ruffins on the porch. The talk eventually 
came around to the trial, and the verdict, and how was it playing on the other side of the 
tracks? 

“Did he really threaten the jury?” Max asked me. I told the story, with Esau adding 
emphasis when needed. They were as shocked as those of us who’d seen it. 

“Thank God he’s locked up for life,” Bobby said, and I didn’t have the heart to tell them 
the truth. They were extremely proud of their mother, as they had been forever. 

I was tired of the trial. I left around nine, drove slowly and aimlessly back through 
Lowtown, alone and missing Ginger. 

*** 

Clanton seethed over the verdict for days. We received eighteen letters to the editor, six 
of which I ran in the next edition. Half of it was devoted to the trial, and this of course 
stirred things up even worse. 

As the summer dragged on, I was beginning to think the town would never stop talking 
about Danny Padgitt and Rhoda Kassellaw. 


Then suddenly, the two became history. Instantly, in the blink of an eye, literally in less 
than twenty-four hours, the trial was forgotten. 

Clanton, both sides of the tracks, had something much more important to fret over. 

Part Two 

Chapter 21 

In a sweeping ruling that left no room for doubt or delay, the Court ordered the 
immediate termination of the dual school system. No more stalling, no more lawsuits, no 
more promises. Instant integration, and Clanton was as shocked as every other town in 
the South. 

Harry Rex brought me the Court’s opinion and tried to explain its intricacies. It wasn’t 
that complicated. Every school district had to immediately implement a desegregation 
plan. 

“This’ll sell some newspapers,” he predicted, unlit cigar crammed in his mouth. 

All sorts of meetings were instantly arranged around town, and I covered them all. On a 
sweltering night in mid-July, a public gathering took place in the gym of the high school. 
The stands were packed, the floor covered with concerned parents. Mr. Walter Sullivan, 
the Times’s lawyer, also served as the attorney for the school board. He did most of the 
talking because he wasn’t elected in any way. The politicians preferred to hide behind 
him. He was blunt and said that in six weeks the Ford County school system would open 
and be fully desegregated. 

A smaller meeting was held at the black school on Burley Street. Baggy and I were there, 
along with Wiley Meek, who took photos. Again Mr. Sullivan explained to the crowd 
what was about to happen. Twice his remarks were interrupted by applause. 

The difference in those two meetings was astounding. The white parents were angry and 
frightened and I saw several women crying. The fateful day had finally arrived. At the 
black school there was an air of victory. The parents were concerned, but they were also 
elated that their children would finally be enrolled in the better schools. Though they had 


miles to go in housing, employment, and health care, integration into the public schools 
was an enormous step forward in their battle for civil rights. 

Miss Callie and Esau were there. They were treated with great respect by their neighbors. 
Six years earlier they had walked into the front door of the white school with Sam and 
fed him to the lions. For three years he was the only black kid in his class, and the family 
paid a price for it. Now it all seemed worth it, at least to them. Sam wasn’t around to 
interview. 

There was also a meeting in the sanctuary of the First Baptist Church. Whites only, and 
the crowd was slightly upper middle class. Its organizers had been raising money to build 
a private academy, and now suddenly the fund-raising was more urgent. Several doctors 
and lawyers were there, and most of the country-club types. Their children were 
apparently too good to go to school with black children. 

They were quickly putting together a plan to open classes in an abandoned factory south 
of town. The building would be leased for a year or two until their capital campaign was 
complete. They were scrambling to hire teachers and order books but the most pressing 
concern, other than running from the blacks, was what to do about a football team. At 
times there was an air of hysteria, as if a 75 percent white school system would pose 
grave dangers for their kids. 

I wrote long reports and ran bold headlines, and Harry Rex was right. The newspapers 
were selling. In fact, by late July 1970 our circulation topped five thousand, a stunning 
turnaround. After Rhoda Kassellaw and desegregation, I was getting a glimpse of what 
my friend Nick Diener said back at Syracuse. “A good small town weekly doesn’t print 
newspapers. It prints money.” 

I needed news, and in Clanton it was not always available. In a slow week, I would run 
an overblown story on the latest filing in the Padgitt appeal. It was usually at the bottom 
of the front page and sounded as if the boy might walk out of Parchman at any minute. 
I’m not sure my readers cared much anymore. In early August, though, the paper got 
another boost when Davey Bigmouth Bass explained to me the rituals of high school 
football. 

Wilson Caudle had no interest in sports, which was fine except that everyone else in 
Clanton lived and died with the Cougars on Friday night. He shoved Bigmouth to the 
back of the paper and rarely ran photos. I smelled money, and the Cougars became front 
page news. 

*** 


My football career ended in the ninth grade, at the hands of a sadistic ex-Marine my soft 
little prep school had for some reason hired to coach us. Memphis in August is the tropics; 
football practice should be banned then and there. I was running laps around the practice 
field, in full gear, helmet and all, in ninety-five-degree heat and humidity, and the coach 
for some reason refused to give us water. The tennis courts were next to the field, and 
after I finished vomiting I gazed upon them and saw two girls swatting tennis balls with 
two guys. With the girls in the scene everything was very pleasant, but what really got 
my attention were the large bottles of cold water they drank whenever they wanted. 

I quit football and took up tennis and girls, and never for an instant regretted it. My 
school played its games on Saturday afternoons, so I was not baptized in the religion of 
Friday night football. 

I happily became a later convert. 

*** 

When the Cougars assembled for their first practice, Bigmouth and Wiley were there to 
cover it. We ran a large front page photo of four players, two white and two black, and 
another of the coaching staff, which included a black assistant. Bigmouth wrote columns 
about the team and its players and prospects, and this was only the first week of practice. 

We covered the opening of school, including interviews with students, teachers, and 
administrators, and our slant was openly positive. In truth, Clanton had little of the racial 
unrest that was common throughout the Deep South when schools opened that August. 

The Times did big stories about the cheerleaders, the band, the junior high teams— 
everything we could possibly think of. And every story had several photos. I don’t know 
how many kids failed to make the pages of our paper, but there weren’t many. 

The first football game was an annual family brawl against Karaway, a much smaller 
town that had a much better coach. I sat with Harry Rex and we screamed until we were 
hoarse. The game was a sellout and the crowd was mostly white. 

But those white folks who had been so adamantly opposed to accepting black students 
were suddenly transformed that Friday night. In the first quarter of the first game, a star 
was born when Ricky Patterson, a pint-size black kid who could fly, ran eighty yards the 
first time he touched the ball. The second time he went forty-five, and from then on 
whenever they tossed it to him the entire crowd stood and yelled. Six weeks after the 


desegregation order hit the town, I saw narrow-minded, intolerant rednecks screaming 
like maniacs and bouncing up and down whenever Ricky got the ball. 

Clanton won 34—30 in a cliffhanger, and our coverage of the game was shameless. The 
entire front page was nothing but football. We immediately initated a Player-of-the-Week, 
with a $100 scholarship award that went into some vague fund that took us months to 
figure out. Ricky was our first honoree, and so that required yet another interview with 
another photo. 

When Clanton won its first four games, the Times was there to stir up the frenzy. Our 
circulation reached fifty-five hundred. 

*** 

One very hot day in early September, I was strolling around the square, going from my 
office to the bank. I was wearing my usual garb—faded jeans, rumpled cotton buttondown shirt with rolled-up sleeves, loafers, no socks. I was then twenty-four years old and 
because I owned a business I was slowly turning my thoughts away from college and 
toward a career. Very slowly. I had long hair and still dressed like a student. I generally 
gave little thought to what I wore or what image I portrayed. 

This lack of concern was not shared by all. 

Mr. Mitlo grabbed me on the sidewalk and shoved me into his small haberdashery. “I 
been waiting for you,” he said with a thick accent, one of the few in Clanton. He was a 
Hungarian and had some colorful history of escaping from Europe while leaving behind a 
child or two. He was on my list of human interest stories to pursue as soon as football 
season was over. 

“Look at you!” he sneered as I stood just inside his door, by a rack of belts. But he was 
smiling and with foreigners it’s easy to dismiss their bluntness due to translation 
problems. 

I sort of looked at myself. What exactly was the problem? 

Evidently, there were many. “You are a professional,” he informed me. “A very 
important man in this town, and you are dressed like, uh, well…” He scratched his 
bearded chin as he searched for the proper insult. 

I tried to help. “A student.” 


“No,” he said, wagging an index finger back and forth as if no student had ever looked 
that bad. He gave up on the put-down and continued the lecture. 

“You are unique—how many people own a newspaper? You are educated, which is rare 
around here. And from up North! You are young, but you shouldn’t look so, so, immature. 
We must work on your image.” 

We went to work, not that I had a choice. He advertised heavily in the Times, so I 
certainly couldn’t tell him to take a hike. Plus, he made sense. The student days were 
gone, the revolution was over. I had escaped Vietnam and the sixties and college, and, 
though I wasn’t ready to settle down to a wife and parenthood, I was beginning to feel my 
age. 

“You must wear suits,” he decided as he went through racks of clothes. Mitlo had been 
known to walk up to the president of a bank and, in a crowd, comment on a faulty shirt 
and suit combo, or a drab tie. He and Harry Rex didn’t get along at all. 

I was not about to start wearing gray suits and wing tips. He pulled out a light blue 
seersucker suit, found a white shirt, then went straight for the tie rack where he picked 
out the perfect red-and-gold-striped bow tie. “Let’s try this,” he announced when his 
selections were finished. “Over there,” he said, pointing to a dressing room. Thankfully, 
the store was empty. I had no choice. 

I gave up on the bow tie. Mitlo reached up and in a skillful flourish had it fixed in a 
second. “Much better,” he said, examining the finished product. I looked at myself in the 
mirror for a long time. I wasn’t sure, but then I was intrigued by the transformation. It 
gave me character and individuality. 

Whether I wanted it or not, the outfit was about to become mine. I had to wear it at least 
once. 

To top it off, he found a white Panama hat that fit nicely on my shaggy head. As he 
adjusted it here and there, he tugged at a patch of hair over my ear and said, “Too much 
hair. You are a professional. Cut it.” 

He altered the slacks and jacket and pressed the shirt, and the following day I arrived to 
collect my new outfit. I planned to simply pick it up, take it home, then wait and wait 
until there was a slow day around town and wear it. I intended to walk straight to Mitlo’s 
so he could see me in his creation. 

He, of course, had other plans. He insisted I try it on, and when I did he then insisted that 
I walk around the entire square to collect my compliments. 

“I’m really in a hurry,” I said. Chancery court was in session and downtown was busy. 


“I insist,” he said dramatically, wagging the finger as if he would not negotiate for a 
second. 

He adjusted the hat, and the final prop was a long black cigar which he cut, stuffed in my 
mouth, and lit with a match. “A powerful image,” he said proudly. “The town’s only 
publisher. Now off.” 

No one recognized me for the first half block. Two farmers in front of the feed store gave 
me a look, but then I didn’t like the way they were dressed either. I felt like Harry Rex 
with the cigar. Mine was lit, though, and very strong. I sprinted by his office. Mrs. Gladys 
Wilkins ran her husband’s insurance agency. She was about forty, very pretty and always 
well dressed. When she saw me she stopped dead in her tracks, then said, “Why Willie 
Traynor. Don’t you look distinguished.” 

“Thank you.” 

“Sorta reminds me of Mark Twain.” 

I walked on, feeling better. Two secretaries did double-takes. “Love that bow tie,” one of 
them called to me. Mrs. Clare Ruth Seagraves stopped me and talked on and on about 
something I’d written months earlier and had forgotten. As she talked she examined my 
suit and bow tie and hat and didn’t even mind the cigar. “You look quite handsome, Mr. 
Traynor,” she said finally, and seemed embarrassed by her candor. I walked slower and 
slower around the square and decided that Mitlo was right. I was a professional, a 
publisher, an important person in Clanton even if I didn’t feel too important, and a new 
image was in order. 

We’d have to find some weaker cigars, though. By the time I completed my tour of the 
square, I was dizzy and had to sit down. 

Mr. Mitlo ordered another blue seersucker and two light gray ones. He decided my 
wardrobe would not be dark like lawyers’ and bankers’, but light and cool and a bit 
unconventional. He dedicated himself to finding me some unique bow ties and proper 
fabrics for the fall and winter. 

Within a month Clanton was accustomed to having a new character around the square. I 
was getting noticed, especially by the opposite sex. Harry Rex laughed at me, but then his 
own outfits were comical. 

The ladies loved it. 

Chapter 22 


In late September there were two notable deaths in one week. The first was Mr. Wilson 
Caudle. He died at home, alone, in the bedroom where he’d secluded himself since the 
day he walked out of the Times. It was odd that I had not spoken to him once in the six 
months I’d owned the paper, but I’d been too busy to fret over it. I certainly didn’t want 
any advice from Spot. And, sadly, I knew of no one who’d either seen him or talked to 
him in the past six months. 

He died on a Thursday and was buried on a Saturday. On Friday I hustled over to Mr. 
Mitlo’s and we had a wardrobe session regarding the proper funeral attire for someone of 
my stature. He insisted on a black suit, and he had just the perfect bow tie. It was narrow 
with black and maroon stripes, very dignified, very respectful, and when it was tied and I 
was properly turned out, I had to admit that the image was impressive. He pulled out a 
black felt fedora from his personal collection and proudly loaned it to me for the funeral. 
He said often that it was a shame American men didn’t wear hats anymore. 

The final touch was a shiny black wooden cane. When he produced it I just stared. “I 
don’t need a cane,” I said. It seemed quite foolish. 

“It’s a walking stick,” he said, thrusting it at me. 

“What’s the difference?” 

He then launched into a baffling history of the crucial role walking sticks had played in 
the evolution of modern European male fashion. He felt passionately about it, and the 
more worked up he got, the thicker his accent became, and the less I understood. To shut 
him up I took the stick. 

The following day, when I walked into the Methodist church for Spot’s funeral, the ladies 
stared at me. Some of the men did too, most of them wondering what the hell I was doing 
with a black hat and a cane. In a whisper just loud enough for me to hear, Stan Atcavage, 
my banker, said behind me, “I guess he’s gonna sing and dance for us.” 

“Been hangin’ around Mitlo’s again,” someone whispered back. 

I accidentally whacked the cane on the pew in front of me, and the noise jolted the 
mourners. I wasn’t sure what one did with a cane while one was seated for a funeral. I 
squeezed it between my legs and placed the hat in my lap. Portraying the right image 
took work. I looked around and saw Mitlo. He was beaming at me. 

The choir began “Amazing Grace,” and we fell into a somber mood. Reverend Clinkscale 
then recited Mr. Caudle’s basics—born in 1896, the only child of our beloved Miss 
Emma Caudle, a widower with no children of his own, a veteran of the First War, and for 
over fifty years the editor of our county weekly. There he brought to an art form the 
obituaries, which would forever be Spot’s claim to fame. 


The reverend rambled on a bit, then a soloist broke the monotony. It was my fourth 
funeral since landing in Clanton. Except for my mother’s, I had never attended one before. 
They were social events in the small town, and often I heard such gems as, “Wasn’t that a 
lovely service,” and “Take care, I’ll see you at the funeral,” and, my favorite, “She would 
have loved it.” 

“She,” of course, was the deceased. 

Folks took off work and wore their Sunday best. If you didn’t go to funerals, then you 
were downright peculiar. Since I had enough oddities working against me, I was 
determined to properly honor the dead. 

*** 

The second death occurred later that night, and when I heard about it on Monday I went 
to my apartment and found my pistol. 

Malcolm Vince was shot twice in the head as he left a honky-tonk in a very remote part 
of Tishomingo County. Tishomingo was dry, the tonk was illegal, and that’s why it was 
hidden so deep in the sticks. 

There were no witnesses to the killing. Malcolm had been drinking beer and shooting 
pool, behaving himself generally and causing no trouble. Two acquaintances told the 
police that Malcolm left by himself around 11 P.M. after about three hours in the tonk. 
He was in good spirits and was not drunk. He said good-bye to them, walked outside, and 
within seconds they heard gunfire. They were almost certain he was not armed. 

The joint was at the end of a dirt trail, and a quarter of a mile up the road a sentry guarded 
a passageway with a shotgun. In theory his job was to alert the owner if the police or 
other unsavory characters were approaching. Tishomingo was on the state line, and there 
had historically been feuds with some hoodlums over in Alabama. Tonks were favorite 
places to settle scores and such. The sentry heard the shots that killed Malcolm, and he 
was certain no car or truck had fled the scene afterward. Any such vehicle would’ve had 
to pass by him. 

Whoever killed Malcolm had come from the woods, on foot, and carried out the hit. I 
talked to the Sheriff of Tishomingo County. He was of the opinion that someone was 
after Malcolm. It certainly wasn’t a garden-variety honky-tonk flare-up. 

“Any idea who might be after Mr. Vince?” I asked, desperately hoping that Malcolm had 
made some enemies two hours away. 


“No idea,” he said. “The boy hadn’t lived here long.” 

For two days I carried the pistol in my pocket, then, again, grew weary of that. If the 
Padgitts wanted to get me or one of the jurors, or Judge Loopus or Ernie Gaddis or 
anyone they deemed guilty of helping send Danny away, then there was little we could do 
to stop them. 

*** 

The paper that week was devoted to Mr. Wilson Caudle. I pulled out some old photos 
from the archives and plastered them all over the front page. We ran testimonials, stories, 
and lots of paid announcements of sympathy from his many friends. I then rehashed 
everything I’d written about him into the longest obituary in the history of the newspaper. 

Spot deserved it. 

I wasn’t sure what to do with the story about Malcolm Vince. He was not a resident of 
Ford County, thus not entirely eligible for an obituary. Our rules were quite flexible when 
it came to that issue. A prominent Ford Countian who’d moved away would still qualify 
for an obituary, but obviously there had to be something to write about. One who’d just 
passed through the county and either had no family or contributed little could not qualify. 
Such was the case of Malcolm Vince. 

If I exaggerated the story, the Padgitts would get the satisfaction of further intimidating 
the county. They would frighten us again. (Of those who’d heard of the killing, no one 
thought it might be the work of anyone other than the Padgitts.) 

If I ignored the story, then I would be running scared and shirking my responsibility as a 
journalist. Baggy thought it was front page material, but there was no room when I was 
finished with our farewell to Mr. Caudle. I ran it at the top of page three, with the 
headline PADGITT WITNESS MURDERED IN TISHOMINGO COUNTY. My first 
headline had been MALCOLM VINCE MURDERED IN TISHOMINGO COUNTY, but 
Baggy felt strongly that we should use the Padgitt name with the word “murdered” in the 
headline. The story was three hundred words. 

I drove to Corinth to snoop around. Harry Rex gave me the name of Malcolm’s divorce 
lawyer, a local act who went by the name of Pud Perryman. His office was on Main 
Street, between a barbershop and a Chinese seamstress, and when I opened the door I 
immediately knew that Mr. Perryman was the least successful lawyer I would ever meet. 
The place reeked of lost cases, dissatisfied clients, and unpaid bills. The carpet was 


stained and threadbare. The furniture was left over from the fifties. A rancid haze of old 
and new cigarette smoke hung in layers, dangerously close to my head. 

Mr. Perryman himself showed no signs of prosperity. He was around forty-five, 
potbellied, unkempt, unshaven, red-eyed. The last hangover was wearing off slowly. He 
informed me he was a divorce and property guy, and I was supposed to be impressed by 
this. Either he didn’t charge enough or he attracted clients with little to sell or fight over. 

He hadn’t seen Malcolm in a month, he said as he looked for a file among the landfill that 
covered his desk. The divorce had never been filed. His efforts to work out an agreement 
with Lydia’s lawyer had gone nowhere. “She flew the coop,” he said. 

“Beg your pardon?” 

“She’s gone. Packed up after the trial over there and hit the road. Took the kid, 
vanished.” 

I really didn’t care what happened to Lydia. I was much more concerned with who shot 
Malcolm. Pud offered a couple of vague theories, but they broke down after a few basic 
questions. He reminded me of Baggy—a local courthouse gossipmonger who’d make up 
a rumor if he doesn’t hear a new one within an hour. 

Lydia had no boyfriends or brothers or anyone else who might want to shoot Malcolm in 
the heat of a bad divorce. And, of course, there was no divorce. The bad blood hadn’t 
even begun! 

Mr. Perryman gave the impression of one who preferred to prattle and tell lies all day, as 
opposed to tending to his files. I was in his office for almost an hour, and when I finally 
managed to leave I ran outside for fresh air. 

I drove thirty minutes to Iuka, the Tishomingo County seat, where I found Sheriff 
Spinner just in time to buy him lunch. Over barbecued chicken in a crowded cafe, he 
brought me up to date on the murder. It was a clean hit by someone who knew the area 
well. They had found nothing—no footprints, no shell casings, nothing. The weapon had 
been a.44 magnum, and the two shots had practically blown off Malcolm’s head. For 
drama, he unholstered his service revolver and passed it over. “This is a forty-four,” he 
said. It was twice as heavy as my meager weapon. I lost what little appetite I had. 

They had talked to every acquaintance they could find. Malcolm had lived in the area for 
about five months. He had no criminal record, no arrests, no reports of fistfights, no dice 
shooting, disturbances, or drunken brawls. He went to the tonk once a week, where he 
shot pool and drank beer and never raised his voice. There were no loans or bills past due 
for more than sixty days. There appeared to be no illicit affairs or jealous husbands. 

“I can’t find a motive,” the Sheriff said. “It doesn’t make sense.” 


I told him about Malcolm’s testimony in the Padgitt trial, and about how Danny 
threatened the jury. He listened intently, and said little afterward. I got the clear 
impression he preferred to stay in Tishomingo County and wanted no part of the Padgitts. 

“That could be your motive,” I said when I finished. 

“Revenge?” 

“Sure. These are nasty people.” 

“Oh, I’ve heard of them. Guess we’re lucky we weren’t on that jury, huh?” 

Driving back to Clanton, I could not erase the image of the Sheriff’s face when he said 
that. Gone was the swagger of a well-armed man of the law. Spinner was truly grateful he 
was two counties away, and had nothing to do with the Padgitts. 

His investigation was dead. Case closed. 

Chapter 23 

The only Jew in Clanton was Mr. Harvey Kohn, a dapper little man who’d been selling 
shoes and handbags to ladies for decades. His store was on the square, next door to the 
Sullivan law firm, in a row of buildings he’d bought during the Depression. He was a 
widower and his children had fled Clanton after high school. Once a month Mr. Kohn 
drove to Tupelo to worship in the nearest synagogue. 

Kohn’s Shoes aimed at the higher end of the market, which was tricky in a small town 
like Clanton. The few wealthy ladies in town preferred shopping in Memphis, where they 
could pay higher prices and talk about it back home. To make his shoes attractive, Mr. 
Kohn put shockingly high prices on them, then slashed them with deep discounts. The 
local ladies could then throw out any price they wanted when they showed off their latest 
purchases. 

He ran the store himself, opening early and staying late, usually with the help of a parttime student. Two years before I arrived in Clanton he hired a sixteen-year-old black kid 
named Sam Ruffin to unpack inventory, move stock, clean the place, answer the phone. 
Sam proved to be bright and industrious. He was courteous, mannerly, well dressed, and 
before long he could be trusted to run the store while Mr. Kohn went home every day at 
precisely eleven forty-five for a quick lunch and a long nap. 

A lady by the name of Iris Durant dropped in around noon one day and found Sam all 
alone. Iris was forty-one years old, the mother of two teenage boys, one in Sam’s class at 


Clanton High. She was mildly attractive, liked to flirt and wear mini-skirts, and usually 
selected shoes from Mr. Kohn’s more exotic inventory. She tried about two dozen 
varieties, bought nothing, and took her time about it. Sam knew his products and was 
very careful with her feet. 

She was back the next day, same time, shorter skirt, heavier makeup. Barefoot, she 
seduced Sam on Mr. Kohn’s desk in his small office just behind the cash register. Thus 
began a torrid affair that would change both their lives. 

Several times a week, Iris went shoe shopping. Sam found a more comfortable spot 
upstairs on an old sofa. He would lock the store for fifteen minutes, turn off the lights, 
and dash up. 

Iris’s husband was a sergeant in the Mississippi Highway Patrol. Alarmed at the number 
of new shoes in her closet, he became suspicious. Suspicion had been a way of life with 
Iris. 

He hired Harry Rex to investigate. A Cub Scout could’ve caught the lovers. Three 
straight days she walked into Kohn’s at the same time; three straight days Sam quickly 
locked the front door, eyes darting in all directions; three straight days the lights went off, 
etc. On the fourth day, Harry Rex and Rafe sneaked in the back of the store. They heard 
noises upstairs. Rafe barged into the love nest and in five seconds gathered enough 
evidence to send both of them packing. 

Mr. Kohn fired Sam an hour later. Harry Rex filed the divorce that afternoon. Iris was 
later admitted to the hospital with cuts, abrasions, and a broken nose. Her husband beat 
her with his fists until she was unconscious. After dark, three uniformed state troopers 
knocked on the door of Sam’s home in Lowtown. They explained to his parents that he 
was wanted by the police in connection with some vague embezzling charge at Kohn’s. If 
convicted he could be sentenced to twenty years in prison. They also told them, off the 
record of course, that Sam had been caught having sex with a white lady, another man’s 
wife, and there was a contract on his head. Five thousand bucks. 

Iris left town disgraced, divorced, without her children, and afraid to return. 

I had heard different versions of Sam’s story. It was old gossip by the time I arrived in 
Clanton, but it was still sensational enough to find its way into many conversations. In 
the South, it was not unusual for white men to keep black mistresses, but Sam’s was the 
first documented case of a white woman crossing the color line in Clanton. 

Baggy had been the one to tell me the story. Harry Rex had confirmed much of it. 

Miss Callie refused to talk about it. Sam was her youngest, and he couldn’t come home. 
He had fled, dropped out of high school, and spent the past two years living off his 
brothers and sisters. Now he was calling me. 


I went to the courthouse and dug through drawers of old files. I found no record of an 
indictment against Sam Ruffin. I asked Sheriff Coley if he had an outstanding warrant. 
He dodged the question and wanted to know why I was poking around in such an old 
case. I asked him if Sam would be arrested if he came home. Again, no direct answer. 
“Be careful, Mr. Traynor,” he warned, but would not elaborate. 

I went to Harry Rex and asked about the now legendary contract on Sam’s head. He 
described his client, Sergeant Durant, as a former Marine, an expert marksman with any 
number of weapons, a career cop, a hothead who was horribly embarrassed by Iris’s 
indiscretion, and who felt the only honorable way out was to kill her lover. He had 
thought about killing her, but didn’t want to go to prison. He felt safer killing a black kid. 
A Ford County jury would be more sympathetic. 

“And he wants to do it himself,” Harry Rex explained. “That way he can save the five 
grand.” 

He enjoyed delivering such dire news to me, but he did admit that he hadn’t seen his 
client in a year and a half, and he wasn’t sure if Mr. Durant hadn’t already remarried. 

*** 

Thursday at noon we settled down at the table on the porch and thanked the Lord for the 
delicious meal we were about to receive. Esau was at work. 

As the garden ripened in late summer, we had enjoyed many vegetarian lunches. Red and 
yellow tomatoes, cucumbers and onions in vinegar, butter beans, snap beans, peas, okra, 
squash, boiled potatoes, corn on the cob, and always hot corn bread. Now, as the air was 
cooler and the leaves were turning, Miss Callie was preparing heartier dishes—duck stew, 
lamb stew, chili, red beans and rice with pork sausage, and the old standby, pot roast. 

The meal that day was chicken and dumplings. I was eating slowly, something she had 
encouraged me to do. I was half through when I said, “Sam called me, Miss Callie.” 

She paused and swallowed, then said, “How is he?” 

“He’s fine. He wants to come home this Christmas, said everybody else was coming back, 
and he wants to be here.” 

“Do you know where he is?” she asked. 

“Do you?” 


“No.” 

“He’s in Memphis. We’re supposed to meet tomorrow, up there.” 

“Why are you meeting with Sam?” She seemed very suspicious of my involvement. 

“He wants me to help him. Max and Bobby told him about our friendship. He said he 
thinks I’m a white person who can be trusted.” 

“It could be dangerous,” she said. 

“For who?” 

“Both of you.” 

Her doctor was concerned about her weight. At times she was too, but not always. With 
particularly heavy dishes, like stews and dumplings, she took small portions and ate 
slowly. The news of Sam gave her a reason to stop eating altogether. She folded her 
napkin and began talking. 

*** 

Sam left Clanton in the middle of the night on a Greyhound bus headed for Memphis. He 
called Callie and Esau when he arrived there. The next day a friend drove up with some 
money and clothing. As the story about Iris broke fast around town, Callie and Esau were 
convinced their youngest son was about to be murdered by the cops. Highway patrol cars 
eased by their house at all hours of the day and night. There were anonymous phone calls 
with threats and abusive language. 

Mr. Kohn filed some papers in court. A hearing date came and went without Sam’s 
appearance. Miss Callie never saw an official indictment, but then she wasn’t sure what 
one looked like. 

Memphis seemed too close, so Sam drifted to Milwaukee where he hid with Bobby for a 
few months. For two years now, he had drifted from one sibling to the next, always 
traveling at night, always afraid that he was about to be caught. The older Ruffin children 
called home often and wrote once a week, but they were afraid to mention Sam. Someone 
might be listening. 


“He was wrong to get involved with a woman like that,” Miss Callie said, sipping tea. I 
had effectively ruined her lunch, but not mine. “But he was so young. He didn’t chase 
her.” 

*** 

The next day I became the unofficial go-between for Sam Ruffin and his parents. 

We met in a coffee shop in a shopping mall in south Memphis. From somewhere in the 
distance, he watched me wait for thirty minutes before he popped in from nowhere and 
sat across from me. Two years on the run had taught him a few tricks. 

His youthful face was showing the strain of life on the lam. Out of habit, he continually 
looked right and left. He tried mightily to hold eye contact, but he could do it only for a 
few seconds. Not surprisingly, he was soft-spoken, articulate, very polite. And quite 
thankful that I had been willing to step forward and explore the possibility of helping him. 

He thanked me for the courtesies and friendship I’d shown his mother. Bobby in 
Milwaukee had shown him the Times stories. We talked about his siblings, his 
movements from UCLA to Duke, then to Toledo, then to Grinnell in Iowa. He couldn’t 
live like that much longer. He was desperate for a resolution to the mess at home so he 
could get on with a normal life. He finished high school in Milwaukee, and planned 
eventually to go to law school. But he couldn’t do it living like a fugitive. 

“There’s a fair amount of pressure on me, you know,” he said. “Seven brothers and 
sisters, seven PhD’s.” 

I described my fruitless search for an indictment, my inquiries to Sheriff Coley, and my 
conversation with Harry Rex about Mr. Durant’s current mood. Sam thanked me 
profusely for this information, and for my willingness to get involved. 

“There’s no threat of being arrested,” I assured him. “There is, however, the threat of 
catching a bullet.” 

“I’d rather be arrested,” he said. 

“Me too.” 

“He’s a very scary man,” Sam said of Mr. Durant. A story followed, one in which I did 
not get all the details. Seems as though Iris was now living in Memphis. Sam kept in 
touch. She had told him some horrible things about her ex-husband and her two teenaged 


boys and the threats they’d made against her. She was not welcome anywhere in Ford 
County. Her life might be in danger too. The boys repeatedly said they hated her and 
never wanted to see her again. 

She was a broken woman who was racked with guilt and suffering a nervous breakdown. 

“And it’s my fault,” Sam said. “I was raised better.” 

Our meeting lasted an hour, and we promised to get together in a couple of weeks. He 
handed me two thick letters he’d written to his parents, and we said good-bye. He 
disappeared in a crowd of shoppers and I couldn’t help but ask myself where an eighteenyear-old kid hides? How does he travel, move around? How does he survive day to day? 
And Sam was not some street kid who’d learned to live by his wits and fists. 

*** 

I told Harry Rex about our meeting in Memphis. My lofty goal was to somehow convince 
Mr. Durant to leave Sam alone. 

Since I was living under the assumption that my name was on a not-so-favored list 
somewhere on Padgitt Island, I had no desire to have it added to another list. I swore 
Harry Rex to secrecy, and had no trouble believing he would protect my role as the 
intermediary. 

Sam would agree to leave Ford County, to finish high school up North, then stay there for 
college and probably for the rest of his life. The kid simply wanted to be able to see his 
parents, to have short visits in Clanton, and to be able to live without looking over his 
shoulder. 

Harry Rex didn’t care, nor did he want to get involved. He promised to relay the message 
to Mr. Durant, but he wasn’t optimistic it would get a sympathetic ear. “He’s a nasty 
sumbitch,” he said more than once. 

Chapter 24 

In early December, I returned to Tishomingo County for a follow-up with Sheriff Spinner. 
I was not surprised to learn that the investigation of the murder of Malcolm Vince had 


produced nothing new. More than once, Spinner described it as a “clean hit,” with 
nothing left behind but a dead body and two bullets that were virtually untraceable. His 
men had talked to every possible friend, acquaintance, and coworker, and found no one 
who knew of any reason why Malcolm would meet such a violent end. 

Spinner had also talked to Sheriff Mackey Don Coley, and not surprisingly, our Sheriff 
had expressed doubt that the murder had anything to do with the Padgitt trial over in Ford 
County. It appeared as though the two sheriffs had some history, and I was relieved to 
hear Spinner say, “Ol’ Coley couldn’t catch a jaywalker on Main Street.” 

I laughed real loud and added, helpfully, “Yeah, he and the Padgitts go way back.” 

“I told him you’d been over, snoopin’ around. He said, ‘That boy’s gonna get hurt.’ Just 
thought you’d like to know.” 

“Thanks,” I said. “Me and Coley see things differently.” 

“Election’s a few months away.” 

“Yes it is. I hear Coley’s got two or three opponents.” 

“Just takes one.” 

Again, he promised to call if something new developed, but both of us knew that was not 
going to happen. I left Iuka and drove to Memphis. 

*** 

Trooper Durant had been quite pleased to learn that his threats were still hanging over the 
head of Sam Ruffin. Harry Rex had eventually delivered the word that the boy was still 
on the run but desperately wanted to come home and see his momma. 

Durant had not remarried. He was very much alone and extremely bitter and embarrassed 
about his wife’s affair. He ranted at Harry Rex about how his life had been destroyed, and 
worse, how his two sons were subject to ridicule and abuse because of what their mother 
did. The white kids at school taunted them daily. The black kids, their new classmates at 
Clanton High, were smug and made wisecracks about it. 

Both boys were expert marksmen and avid hunters, and the three Durants had vowed to 
put a bullet into Sam Ruffin’s head if given the chance. They knew exactly where the 
Ruffins lived in Lowtown. Durant commented on the annual pilgrimage many blacks 


from the North made at Christmastime. “If that boy sneaks home, we’ll be waitin’,” he 
promised Harry Rex. 

He also had some venom for me, and for my heartwarming stories about Miss Callie and 
her older children. He guessed correctly that I was the family’s contact with Sam. 

“You’d better get your nose outta this mess,” Harry Rex warned me after his meeting 
with Durant. “This is a nasty character.” 

I wasn’t anxious to have someone else dreaming of my painful death. 

I met Sam at a truck stop near the state line, about a mile into Tennessee. Miss Callie had 
sent cakes and pies and letters and some cash, an entire cardboard box that filled the other 
seat in my little Spitfire. It was the first time in two years she had been able to touch him 
in any way. He tried to read one of her letters, but became emotional and put it back in 
the envelope. “I’m so homesick,” he said, wiping huge tears while at the same time trying 
to hide them from the truckers eating nearby. He was a lost, scared little boy. 

With brutal honesty, I recounted the conversation with Harry Rex. Sam had naively 
thought his offer to stay away from Ford County but visit occasionally would be 
acceptable to Mr. Durant. He had little grasp of the hatred he had inspired. He did, 
however, seem to appreciate the danger. 

“He’ll kill you, Sam,” I said gravely. 

“And he’ll get by with it, won’t he?” 

“What difference will that make to you? You’ll be just as dead. Miss Callie would rather 
have you alive up North than dead in the Clanton cemetery.” 

We agreed to meet again in two weeks. He was doing his Christmas shopping, and he 
would have gifts for his parents and family. 

We said good-bye and left the dining area. I was almost to my car when I decided to step 
back inside and use the men’s room. It was in the rear of a tacky gift shop next to the cafe. 
I glanced out a window and saw Sam, very suspiciously, jump into a car driven by a 
white woman. She looked to be older, early forties. Iris, I presumed. Some people never 
learn. 

*** 


The Ruffin clan began arriving three days before Christmas. Miss Callie had been 
cooking for a week. She sent me to the grocery store twice for emergency supplies. I was 
quickly adopted into the family and given full privileges, the highest of which was to eat 
whenever and whatever I wanted. 

Growing up in that house, the children’s lives had been centered around their parents, 
each other, the Bible, and the kitchen table. And for the holidays there was always a fresh 
dish of something on the table, and another two or three on the stove or in the oven. The 
announcement “Pecan pies are ready!” sent shockwaves through the small house, across 
the porch, and even into the street. The family gathered at the table where Esau rather 
quickly thanked the Lord yet again for his family and their health and for the food they 
were about to “partake”; then the pies would be cut into thick wedges, laid on saucers, 
and carried off in all directions. 

The same ritual was followed for pumpkin pies, coconut pies, strawberry cakes, the list 
went on and on. And those were just the light little snacks that carried them from one 
major meal to the next. 

Unlike their mother, the Ruffin children were not the slightest bit heavy. And I soon 
learned why. They complained that they were unable to eat like this anymore. The food 
where they lived was bland and much of it was frozen and mass-produced. There were a 
lot of ethnic foods they simply could not digest. And the people ate in a hurry. The list of 
complaints grew. 

My hunch was that they had been so spoiled by Miss Callie’s cooking that nothing would 
ever measure up. 

Carlota, who was single and taught urban studies at UCLA, was especially entertaining 
when telling stories of the latest wacky food trends sweeping California. Raw foods were 
the current rage—lunch was a plate of raw carrots and raw celery, all to be choked down 
with a small cup of hot herbal tea. 

Gloria, who taught Italian at Duke, was considered the luckiest of the seven because she 
was still in the South. She and Miss Callie compared notes on the different recipes for 
things such as corn bread, Brunswick stew, and even collard greens. These discussions 
often turned serious, with the men offering opinions and observations, and more than one 
argument erupted. 

After a three hour lunch, Leon (Leonardo), who taught biology at Purdue, asked me to go 
for a ride. He was the second oldest, and carried a slight academic air that the others had 
managed to avoid. He had a beard, smoked a pipe, wore a tweed blazer with worn arm 
patches, and used a vocabulary that he must’ve spent hours practicing. 

We roamed the streets of Clanton in his car. He wanted to know about Sam, and I told 
him everything. In my opinion, whatever that was worth, it was too dangerous for him to 
enter Ford County. 


And he wanted to know about the trial of Danny Padgitt. I had sent copies of the Times to 
all of the Ruffins. One of Baggy’s reports had emphasized the threat made by Danny to 
the jurors. The exact quote had been highlighted, “You convict me, and I’ll get every 
damned one of you.” 

“Will he ever be released from prison?” Leon asked. 

“Yes,” I said, reluctantly. 

“When?” 

“No one knows. He got life for murder, life for rape. Ten years is the minimum for each, 
but I’m told weird things happen in the Mississippi parole system.” 

“So it’s twenty years minimum?” I’m sure he was thinking about his mother’s age. She 
was fifty-nine. 

“No one’s sure. There is the possibility of good time, which reduces the minimum.” 

He seemed as confused by this as I had been. Truth was, no one connected to either the 
judicial system or the penal system had been able to answer my questions about Danny’s 
sentence. Parole in Mississippi was a vast dark pit, and I was afraid to get too close. 

Leon told me that he had quizzed his mother at length about the verdict. Specifically, did 
she vote for the life sentence, or did she want death? Her response had been that the jury 
vowed to keep its deliberations a secret. “What do you know?” he asked me. 

Not much. She had strongly implied to me that she had not agreed with the verdict, but it 
was nothing definite. In the weeks after the verdict there had been an avalanche of 
speculation. Most courthouse regulars had settled on the theory that three, maybe four, of 
the jurors had refused to vote for the death penalty. Miss Callie was generally considered 
not to be in that group. 

“Did the Padgitts get to them?” he asked. We were easing into the long shaded front drive 
of Clanton High School. 

“That’s the prevailing theory,” I said. “But no one really knows. The last death penalty in 
this county for a white defendant was forty years ago.” 

He stopped his car and we looked at the stately oak doors of the school. “So it’s finally 
integrated,” he said. 

“It is.” 


“Never thought I’d see it.” He smiled with great satisfaction. “I used to dream of going to 
this school. My father worked as a janitor here when I was a little boy, and I would come 
over on Saturdays and walk those long hallways and see how nice everything was. I 
understood why I wasn’t welcome here, but I never accepted it.” 

There was not much I could add to this, so I just listened. He seemed more sad than bitter. 

We finally drove away and crossed the tracks. Back in Lowtown, I was amazed at the 
number of fine automobiles with out-of-state tags that were parked tightly in the streets. 
Large families sat on porches in the frigid air; children played in the yards and the streets. 
Other cars arrived, all with brightly wrapped packages in the rear windows. 

“Home is where Momma is,” Leon said. “And everybody comes home for Christmas.” 

As we stopped near Miss Callie’s, Leon thanked me for befriending his mother. “She 
talks about you all the time,” he said. 

“It’s all about lunch,” I said, and we both laughed. At the front gate, a new aroma wafted 
from the house. Leon froze, took a long whiff, said, “Pumpkin pie.” The voice of 
experience. 

At various times, each of the seven professors thanked me for my friendship with Miss 
Callie She had shared her life with many, had lots of close friends, but for more than 
eight months had especially cherished her time with me. 

I left them late in the afternoon on Christmas Eve as they were preparing for church. 
Afterward, there would be gifts and singing. There were more than twenty Ruffins 
staying in the house; I couldn’t imagine where everyone slept, and I was certain no one 
really cared. 

As accepted as I was, I did feel the need to leave them at some point. Later, there would 
be hugs and tears, and songs and stories, and, though I was certainly welcome to 
experience all of it, I knew there were times when families needed to be alone. 

What did I know about families? 

I drove to Memphis, where my childhood home had not seen a Christmas decoration in 
ten years. My father and I had dinner at a Chinese joint not far from the house. As I 
choked down bad wonton soup I couldn’t help but think of the chaos of Miss Callie’s 
kitchen and all those wonderful dishes being pulled from the oven. 

My father worked hard to seem interested in my newspaper. I obligingly sent him a copy 
each week, but after a few minutes of chitchat I could tell he had never read a word. He 
was concerned with some ominous connection between the war in Southeast Asia and the 
bond market. 


We ate quickly and went in different directions. Sadly, neither of us had given any 
thought to exchanging gifts. 

Christmas lunch was with BeeBee, who, unlike my father, was delighted to see me. She 
invited three of her little blue-haired widow friends over for sherry and ham, and the five 
of us proceeded to get tipsy. I regaled them with stories from Ford County, some accurate, 
some highly embellished. Hanging around Baggy and Harry Rex, I was learning the art of 
storytelling. 

By 3 P.M… we were all napping. Early the next morning, I raced back to Clanton. 

Chapter 25 

One frigid day late in January, shots rang out somewhere around the square. I was sitting 
at my desk, peacefully typing a story about Mr. Lamar Farlowe and his recent reunion in 
Chicago with his battalion of Army paratroopers, when a bullet shattered a windowpane 
less than twenty feet from my head. A slow news week thus came to a sudden end. 

My bullet was either the second or the third in a fairly rapid sequence. I hit the floor with 
all sorts of thoughts—Where was my pistol? Were the Padgitts assaulting the town? 
Were Trooper Durant and his boys after me? On my hands and knees I scrambled to my 
briefcase as shots continued to crack through the air; they sounded like they were coming 
from across the street, but in the horror of the moment I really couldn’t tell. They 
sounded much louder after one hit my office. 

I emptied the briefcase and then remembered the pistol was either in my car or my 
apartment. I was unarmed and felt like such a weakling for not being able to defend 
myself. Harry Rex and Rafe had trained me better. 

I was scared to the point of not being able to move. Then I remembered Bigmouth Bass 
was in his office downstairs, and like most real men in Clanton he had an arsenal close by. 
There were handguns in his desk and he kept two hunting rifles on the wall, just in case 
he got the urge to run out and kill a deer during lunch. Anyone trying to get me would 
encounter stiff resistance by my staff. I hoped so anyway. 

There was a pause in the assault, then shouts of panic and chaos on the streets. It was 
almost 2 P.M… normally a busy time downtown. I crawled under my desk like I’d been 
taught in tornado warning drills. From somewhere below I heard Bigmouth yell, “Stay in 
your offices!” I could almost see him down there, grabbing a 30.06 and a box of shells, 
ducking into a doorway in great anticipation. I couldn’t imagine a worse place for some 
nut to start shooting. There were thousands of guns within arm’s reach around the 


Clanton square. Every pickup had two rifles in the window rack and a shotgun under the 
seat. These people couldn’t wait to use their guns! 

It wouldn’t be long before the locals returned fire. That’s when the war would really get 
ugly. 

Then the shots resumed. They weren’t getting any closer, I decided as I tried to breathe 
normally under the desk and analyze things. As the seconds slowly ticked by I realized 
that the assault was not aimed at me. I just happened to own a nearby window. Sirens 
approached, then more shots, more shouting. What in the world! 

A phone rang downstairs and someone grabbed it quickly. 

“Willie! You okay!” Bigmouth yelled from the bottom of the steps. 

“Yeah!” 

“There’s a sniper on top of the courthouse!” 

“Great!” 

“Stay low!” 

“Don’t worry!” 

I relaxed a little and emerged just enough to grab my phone. I called Wiley Meek at home, 
but he was already headed our way. Then I crawled across the floor to one of the French 
doors and opened it. Evidently this caught the attention of our sniper. He shattered a pane 
four feet above me and the glass fell like heavy rain. I dropped to my stomach and 
stopped breathing for what seemed like an hour. The gunfire was relentless. Whoever he 
was he was certainly perturbed about something. 

Eight shots, each sounding much louder now that I was outside. A fifteen-second pause 
as he reloaded, then eight more. I heard glass shatter, bullets ricochet off bricks, bullets 
split through wooden posts. Somewhere in the midst of the barrage, the voices became 
silent. 

When I could move again, I gently pulled one of the rocking chairs over on its side, then 
crawled behind it. The porch had a wrought-iron railing around it, and with that and the 
chair in front of me, I was concealed and protected. I’m not sure why I felt compelled to 
move closer to the sniper, but I was twenty-four years old and owned the newspaper and 
knew that I would write a lengthy story about this dramatic episode. I needed details. 

When I finally peeked through the chair and the railing, I saw the sniper. The courthouse 
had an oddly flattened dome, on top of which was a small cupola with four open 
windows. He’d made his nest there, and when I first saw him he was peeking just above 


the sill of one of the windows. He appeared to have a black face with white hair, and this


sent more chills through my body. We were dealing with a world-class psycho.
He was reloading, and when he was ready he rose slightly and began shooting completely
at random. He appeared to be shirtless, which, given the situation, seemed even stranger
since it was around thirty degrees with a chance of light snow later in the afternoon. I was
freezing and I was wearing a rather handsome wool suit from Mitlo’s.


His chest was white with black stripes, sort of like a zebra. It was a white man who’d


painted himself partially black.
All traffic was gone. The city police had blocked the streets and cops were darting about,
squatting low and hiding behind their cars. In the store windows an occasional face
popped out for a quick scan, then disappeared. The shooting stopped and the sniper
ducked low and disappeared for a while. Three county deputies dashed along a sidewalk
and into the courthouse. Long minutes passed.


Wiley Meek bounded up the steps of my office and was soon beside me. He was
breathing so hard I thought he’d sprinted from his house out in the country. “He hit us!”
he whispered, as if the sniper could hear. He was examining the broken glass.


“Twice,” I said, nodding up at the broken panes.
“Where is he?” he asked as he moved a camera with a long-range lens into position.
“The cupola,” I said, pointing. “Be careful. He hit that door when I opened it.”
“Have you seen him?”
“Male, white, with black highlights.”
“Oh, one of those.”
“Keep your head down.”
We stayed huddled and crouched for several minutes. More cops scurried about, going


nowhere in particular and giving the distinct impression that they were thrilled to be there
but had little idea what to do.
“Anybody hurt?” Wiley asked, suddenly anxious that maybe he’d missed some blood.


“How am I supposed to know?”
Then more shots, very quick and startling. We peeked and saw him from the shoulders up,
blazing away. Wiley focused and began taking pictures through the long-range lens.



Baggy and the boys were in the Bar Room on the third floor, not directly under the 
cupola, but not far from it. In fact, they were probably the closest humans to the sniper 
when he began his target practice. After the shooting resumed for the ninth or tenth time, 
they evidently became even more frightened and, convinced they were about to be 
slaughtered, decided they had to take matters into their own hands. Somehow they 
managed to pry open the intractable window of their little hideaway. We watched as an 
electrical cord was thrown out and fell almost to the ground, forty feet below. Baggy’s 
right leg appeared next as he flung it over the brick sill and wiggled his portly body 
through the opening. Not surprisingly, Baggy had insisted on going first. 

“Oh my God,” Wiley said, somewhat gleefully, and raised his camera. “They’re drunk as 
skunks.” 

Clutching the electrical cord with all the grit he could muster, Baggy sprung free from the 
window and began his descent to safety. His strategy was not apparent. He appeared to 
give no slack on the cord, his hands frozen to it just above his head. Evidently there was 
plenty of cord left in the Bar Room, and his cohorts were supposed to ease him down. 

As his hands rose higher above his head, his pants became shorter. Soon they were just 
below his knees, leaving a long gap of pale white skin before his black socks bunched 
around his ankles. Baggy wasn’t concerned about appearances—before, during, or after 
the sniper incident. 

The shooting stopped, and for a while Baggy just hung there, slowly twisting against the 
building, about three feet below the window. Major could be seen inside, clinging 
fiercely to the cord. He had only one leg though, and I worried that it would quickly give 
out. Behind him I could see two figures, probably Wobble Tackett and Chick Elliot, the 
usual poker gang. 

Wiley began laughing, a low suppressed laugh that shook his entire body. 

With each lull in the shooting, the town took a breath, peeked around, and hoped it was 
over. And each new round scared us more than the last. 

Two shots rang out. Baggy lurched as if he’d been hit—though in reality there was no 
possible way the sniper could even see him, and the suddenness evidently put too much 
pressure on Major’s leg. It collapsed, the cord sprang free, and Baggy screamed as he 
dropped like a cinder block into a row of thick boxwoods that had been planted by the 
Daughters of the Confederacy. The boxwoods absorbed the load, and, much like a 
trampoline, recoiled and sent Baggy to the sidewalk, where he landed like a melon and 
became the only casualty of the entire episode. 

I heard laughter in the distance. 

Without a trace of mercy, Wiley recorded the entire spectacle. The photos would be 
furtively passed around Clanton for years to come. 


For a long time Baggy didn’t move. “Leave the sumbitch out there,” I heard a cop yell 
below us. 

“You can’t hurt a drunk,” Wiley said as he caught his breath. 

Eventually, Baggy rose to all fours. Slowly and painfully, he crawled, like a dog hit by a 
truck, into the boxwoods that had saved his life, and there he rode out the storm. 

A police car had been parked three doors down from the Tea Shoppe. The sniper fired a 
burst at it, and when the gas tank exploded we forgot about Baggy. The crisis stepped up 
to the next level as thick smoke poured out from under the car, then we saw flames. The 
sniper found this sporting, and for a few minutes he hit nothing but cars. I was certain my 
Spitfire would be irresistible, but perhaps it was too small. 

He lost his nerve, though, when fire was eventually returned. Two of Sheriff Coley’s men 
stationed themselves on roofs, and when they unloaded on the cupola the sniper ducked 
low and was out of business. 

“I got him!” one of the deputies shouted down to Sheriff Coley. 

We waited for twenty minutes; all was quiet. Baggy’s old wing tips and black socks 
could be seen from under the boxwoods, but the rest was hidden. Occasionally, Major, 
glass in hand, would look down and yell something at Baggy, who could have been dying 
for all we knew. 

More cops sprinted into the courthouse. We relaxed and sat in the rockers, but we did not 
take our eyes off the cupola. Bigmouth, Margaret, and Hardy joined us on the balcony. 
They had watched Baggy’s descent from the front window downstairs. Only Margaret 
was concerned about his injuries. 

The police car burned until the fire department eventually showed up and doused it. The 
doors of the courthouse opened and some of the county employees came out and began 
smoking furiously. Two deputies managed to retrieve Baggy from the boxwoods. He was 
barely able to walk, and was obviously in great pain. They placed him in a patrol car and 
took him away. 

Then we saw a deputy in the cupola, and the town was safe again. The five of us hurried 
over to the courthouse, along with the rest of downtown Clanton. 

The third floor was sealed off. Court was not in session, so Sheriff Coley directed us to 
the courtroom, where he promised a quick briefing. As we were walking into the 
courtroom, I saw Major, Chick Elliot, and Wobble Tackett being escorted down the hall 
by a deputy. They were obviously drunk and laughing so hard they had trouble staying on 
their feet. Wiley went downstairs to sniff around. A body was about to be removed from 


the courthouse, and he wanted a shot of the sniper. The white hair, black face, painted 
stripes—there were a lot of questions. 

*** 

The deputy sharpshooters had evidently missed. The sniper was identified as Hank 
Hooten, the local lawyer who had assisted Ernie Gaddis in the prosecution of Danny 
Padgitt. He was in custody and unharmed. 

When Sheriff Coley announced this in the courtroom, we were shocked and bewildered. 
Our nerves were pretty raw anyway, but this was too much to believe. “Mr. Hooten was 
found in the small stairwell that leads up to the cupola,” Coley was saying, but I was too 
stunned to take notes. “He did not resist arrest and is now in custody.” 

“What was he wearing?” someone asked. 

“Nothing.” 

“Nothing?” 

“Absolutely nothing. He had what appeared to be black shoe polish on his face and chest, 
but other than that he was as naked as a newborn.” 

“What type of weapons?” I asked. 

“We found two high-powered rifles, that’s all I can say right now.” 

“Did he say anything?” 

“Not a word.” 

Wiley said they wrapped Hank in some sheets and shoved him in the backseat of a patrol 
car. He shot some photos but was not optimistic. “There were a dozen cops around him,” 
he said. 

We drove to the hospital to check on Baggy. His wife worked the night shift in the 
emergency room. Someone had called her, woke her up, summoned her to the hospital, 
and when we met her she was in a foul mood. “Just a broken arm,” she said, obviously 
disappointed that it was not more serious. “Some scrapes and bruises. What’d the fool 
do?” 


I looked at Wiley and Wiley looked at me. 

“Was he drunk?” she asked. Baggy was always drunk. 

“Don’t know,” I said. “He fell out of a window at the courthouse.” 

“Oh, brother. He was drunk.” 

I gave a quick version of Baggy’s escape and tried to make it sound as if he’d done 
something heroic in the midst of all that gunfire. 

“The third floor?” she asked. 

“Yes.” 

“So he was playing poker, drinking whiskey, and he jumped out of a third-floor 
window.” 

“Basically, yes,” Wiley said, unable to stop himself. 

“Not exactly,” I said, but she was already walking away. 

Baggy was snoring when we finally got back to his room. The medications had mixed 
with the whiskey and he appeared comatose. “He will wish he could sleep forever,” 
Wiley whispered. 

And he was right. The legend of Bouncin’ Baggy was told countless times in the years 
that followed. Wobble Tackett would swear that Chick Elliot let go of the cord first, and 
Chick would argue that Major’s good leg buckled first and caused a chain reaction. The 
town quickly believed that, whoever let go first, the three idiots Baggy left behind in the 
Bar Room had intentionally dropped him into the boxwoods. 

*** 

Two days later, Hank Hooten was sent to the state mental hospital at Whitfield, where he 
would remain for several years. He was initially indicted for trying to kill half of Clanton, 
but with time the charges were dropped. He allegedly told Ernie Gaddis that he was not 
shooting at anyone in particular, didn’t want to harm anyone, but was just upset because 
the town had failed to send Danny Padgitt to his death. 


Word eventually drifted back to Clanton that he had been diagnosed as severely 
schizophrenic. “Slap-ass crazy,” was the conclusion on the streets. 

Never in the history of Ford County had a person lost his mind in such a spectacular 
fashion. 

Chapter 26 

One year after I bought the newspaper, I sent BeeBee a check for $55,000—her loan plus 
interest at the rate of 10 percent. She had not discussed the matter of interest when she 
gave me the money, nor had we signed a promissory note. Ten percent was a bit high, 
and I hoped it would prompt her to send the check back. I sent it, held my breath, 
watched the mail, and sure enough, about a week later there was a letter from Memphis. 

Dear William: 

I enclose your check, which I was not expecting and have no use for at this time. If, for 
some unlikely reason, I need the money in the future, then we shall at that time discuss 
this matter. Your offer of payment makes me extremely proud of you and your integrity. 
What you have accomplished in one year down there is a source of great pride for me, 
and I delight in telling my friends about your success as a newspaper publisher and editor. 

I must confess that I was worried about you when you came home from Syracuse. You 
appeared to lack direction and motivation, and your hair was too long. You have proven 
me wrong, and cut your hair(a little) to boot. You have also become quite the gentleman 
in your dress and manners. 

You’re all I have, William, and I love you dearly. Please write me more often. 

Love, BeeBee 

P.S. Did that poor man really take off his clothes and shoot up the town? What characters 
you have down there! 

BeeBee’s first husband had died of some colorful illness in 1924. She then married a 
divorced cotton merchant and they had one child, my poor mother. The second husband, 
my grandfather, died in 1938, leaving BeeBee with a nice bundle. She stopped marrying 
and had spent the last thirty-odd years counting her money, playing bridge, and traveling. 
As the only grandchild, I was set to inherit all she had, though I had no clue as to the 
extent of her fortune. 

If BeeBee wanted more letters from me, then she could certainly have them. 

I happily tore up the check, walked down to the bank, and borrowed another $50,000 
from Stan Atcavage. Hardy had found a slightly used offset press in Atlanta, and I bought 
it for $108,000. We ditched our ancient letterpress and moved into the twentieth century. 
The Times took on a new look—much cleaner print, sharper photos, smarter designs. Our 
circulation was at six thousand and I could see steady, profitable growth. The elections of 
1971 certainly helped. 

*** 

I was astounded at the number of people who ran for public office in Mississippi. Each 
county was divided into five districts, and each district had an elected constable, who 
wore a badge and a gun and whatever uniform he could put together, and if he could 
afford it, which he always managed, he put lights on his car and had the authority to pull 
over anyone at any time for any conceivable offense. No training was required. No 
education. No supervision from the county Sheriff or the city police chief, no one but the 
voters every four years. In theory he was a summons server, but once elected most 
constables couldn’t resist the powerful urge to strap on a gun and look for folks to arrest. 

The more traffic tickets a constable wrote, the more money he earned. It was a part-time 
job with a nominal salary, but at least one of the five in each county tried to live off the 
position. This was the guy who caused the most trouble. 

Each district had an elected Justice of the Peace, a judicial officer with absolutely no 
legal training, in 1971 anyway. No education was required for the job. No experience. 
Just votes. The J.P. judged all the people the constable hauled in, and their relationship 
was cozy and suspicious. Out-of-state drivers who got nailed by a constable in Ford 
County were usually in for some abuse at the hands of the J.P. 

Each county had five supervisors, five little kings who held the real power. For their 
supporters they paved roads, fixed culverts, gave away gravel. For their enemies they did 
little. All county ordinances were enacted by the Board of Supervisors. 


Each county also had an elected sheriff, tax collector, tax assessor, chancery court clerk, 
and coroner. The rural counties shared a state senator and state representative. Other 
available jobs in 1971 were highway commissioner, public service commissioner, 
commissioner of agriculture, state treasurer, state auditor, attorney general, lieutenant 
governor, and governor. 

I thought this was a ridiculous and cumbersome system until the candidates for these 
positions began buying ads in the Times. A particularly bad constable over in the Fourth 
District (also known as “Beat Four”) had eleven opponents by the end of January. Most 
of these poor boys eased into our offices with an “announcement” that their wives had 
handwritten on notebook paper. I would patiently read them, editing, decoding, 
translating along the way. Then I would take their money and run their little ads, almost 
all of which began with either “After months of prayer…” or “Many people have asked 
me to run…” 

By late February, the county was consumed with the August election. Sheriff Coley had 
two opponents with two more threatening. The deadline to file for office was June, and 
he had yet to do so. This fueled speculation that he might not run. 

It took little to fuel speculation about anything when it came to local elections. 

*** 

Miss Callie clung to the old-fashioned belief that eating in restaurants was a waste of 
money, and therefore sinful. Her list of potential sins was longer than most folks’, 
especially mine. It took almost six months to convince her to go to Claude’s for a 
Thursday lunch. I argued that if I paid, then we wouldn’t be wasting her money. She 
wouldn’t be guilty of any transgression, and if I got hit with another one I really didn’t 
care. Dining out was certainly the most benign in my inventory. 

I wasn’t worried about being seen in downtown Clanton with a black woman. I didn’t 
care what people said. I wasn’t worried about having the only white face in Claude’s. 
What really concerned me, and what almost kept me from suggesting the idea in the first 
place, was the challenge of getting Miss Callie in and out of my Triumph Spitfire. It 
wasn’t built for hefty folks like her. 

She and Esau owned an old Buick that had once held all eight children. Add another 
hundred pounds and Miss Callie could still slide in and out of the front seat with ease. 


She was not getting smaller. Her high blood pressure and high cholesterol were of great 
concern to her children. She was sixty years old and healthy, but trouble was looming. 

We walked to the street and she peered down at my car. It was March and windy with a 
chance of rain, so the convertible top was up. In its closed state, the two-seater looked 
even smaller. 

“I’m not sure this is going to work,” she announced. It had taken six months to get her 
that far; we were not turning back. I opened the passenger door and she approached with 
great caution. 

“Any suggestions?” she said. 

“Yes, try the rear-end-first method.” 

It worked, eventually, and when I started the engine we were shoulder to shoulder. 
“White folks sure drive some funny cars,” she said, as frightened as if she were flying in 
a small plane for the first time. I popped the clutch, spun the tires, and we were off, 
slinging gravel and laughing. 

I parked in front of the office and helped her out. Getting in was far easier. Inside, I 
introduced her to Margaret Wright and Davey Bigmouth Bass, and I gave her a tour. She 
was curious about the offset press because the paper now looked so much better. “Who 
does the proofreading around here?” she whispered. 

“You do,” I said. We were averaging three mistakes per week, according to her. I still got 
the list every Thursday over lunch. 

We took a stroll around the square and eventually made it to Claude’s, the black cafe next 
to City Cleaners. Claude had been in business for many years and served the best food in 
town. He didn’t need menus because you ate whatever he happened to be cooking that 
day. Wednesday was catfish and Friday was barbecue, but for the other four days you 
didn’t know what you would eat until Claude told you. He greeted us in a dirty apron and 
pointed to a table at the front window. The cafe was half-full and we got some curious 
stares. 

Oddly enough, Miss Callie had never met Claude. I had assumed that every black person 
in Clanton had at one time bumped into every other one, but Miss Callie explained that 
was not the case. Claude lived out in the country, and there was an awful rumor over in 
Lowtown that he did not go to church. She had never been anxious to meet him. They 
had attended a funeral together years earlier, but had not met. 

I introduced them, and when Claude put her name with her face he said, “The Ruffin 
family. All them doctors.” 

“PhD’s,” Miss Callie said, correcting him. 


Claude was loud and gruff and charged for his food and did not go to church, so Miss 
Callie immediately disliked him. He took the hint, didn’t really care, and went off to yell 
at someone in the back. A waitress brought us iced tea and corn bread, and Miss Callie 
didn’t like either. The tea was weak and almost sugarless, according to her, and the corn 
bread lacked enough salt and was served at room temperature, an unforgivable offense. 

“It’s a restaurant, Miss Callie,” I said in a low voice. “Would you relax?” 

“I’m trying.” 

“No you’re not. How can we enjoy a meal if you’re frowning at everything?” 

“That’s a pretty bow tie.” 

“Thank you.” 

My upgraded wardrobe had pleased no one more than Miss Callie. Negroes liked to dress 
up and were very fashion conscious, she explained to me. She still referred to herself as a 
Negro. 

In the wake of the civil rights movement and the complicated issues it had spun, it was 
difficult to know exactly what to call blacks. The older, more dignified ones like Miss 
Callie preferred to be called “Negroes.” A notch below them on the social ladder were 
“coloreds.” 

Though I had never heard Miss Callie use the word, it was not uncommon for upper 
blacks to refer to the lowest of their kind as “niggers.” 

I could not begin to understand the labels and classes, so I adhered strictly to the safety of 
“blacks.” Those on my side of the tracks had an entire dictionary to describe blacks, little 
of which was endearing. 

At that moment, I was the only non-Negro in Claude’s, and this bothered no one. 

“What y’all eatin’?” Claude yelled from the counter. A blackboard advertised Texas chili, 
fried chicken, and pork chops. Miss Callie knew the chicken and pork would be sub-par, 
so we both ordered chili. 

I got a gardening report. The winter greens were especially nice. She and Esau were 
preparing to plant the summer crop. The Farmer’s Almanac predicted a mild summer 
with average rain—same prediction every year—and she was excited about warmer 
weather and lunch back on the porch, where it belonged. I began with Alberto, the oldest, 
and half an hour later she ended with Sam, the youngest. He was back in Milwaukee, 
staying with Roberto, working and taking classes at night. All children and grandchildren 
were doing well. 


She wanted to talk about “poor Mr. Hank Hooten.” She remembered him well from the 
trial, though he had never spoken to the jury. I passed along the latest news. He was now 
living in a room with padded walls, where he would remain for some time. 

The restaurant filled up quickly. Claude walked by with an armload of plates and said, 
“Y’all finished, time to go.” She pretended to be insulted by this, but Claude was famous 
for telling people to leave as soon as they were finished. On Fridays, when a few whites 
ventured in for barbeque and the place was packed, he put a clock on his customers and 
said, loudly, “You got twenty minutes.” 

She pretended to dislike the experience—the idea itself, the restaurant, the cheap 
tablecloth, the food, Claude, the prices, the crowd, everything. But it was an act. She was 
secretly delighted to be taken to lunch by a well-dressed young white man. It had not 
happened to any of her friends. 

As I gently pulled her out of the car back in Lowtown, she reached into her purse and 
took out a small scrap of paper. Only two typos that week; oddly, both were in classifieds, 
an area that Margaret handled. 

I walked her to the house. “That wasn’t so bad now, was it?” I said. 

“I enjoyed it. Thank you. Are you coming next Thursday?” She asked the same question 
each week. The answer was the same too. 

Chapter 27 

At noon on the Fourth of July the temperature was 101 degrees and the humidity felt even 
higher. The parade was led by the Mayor, even though he was not yet running for 
anything. State and local elections were in 1971. The presidential race was in 1972. 
Judicial elections were in 1973. Municipal elections were in 1974. Mississippians loved 
voting almost as much as football. 

The Mayor sat on the rear seat of a 1962 Corvette and threw candy to the children packed 
along the sidewalks around the square. Behind him were two high school bands, 
Clanton’s and Karaway’s, the Boy Scouts, Shriners on mini-bikes, a new fire truck, a 
dozen floats, a posse on horseback, veterans from every war that century, a collection of 
shiny new cars from the Ford dealer, and three restored John Deere tractors. Juror number 
eight, Mr. Mo Teale, drove one. The rear was protected by a string of city and county 
police cars, all polished to perfection. 


I watched the parade from the third-floor balcony of the Security Bank. Stan Atcavage 
threw an annual party up there. Since I now owed the bank a sizable sum, I was invited to 
sip lemonade and watch the festivities. 

For a reason no one could remember, the Rotarians were in charge of the speeches. They 
had parked a long flatbed trailer next to the Confederate sentry and decorated it with 
bales of hay and red, white, and blue bunting. When the parade was over, the throng 
moved tightly around the trailer and waited anxiously. An old-fashioned courthouse 
hanging couldn’t have drawn a more expectant audience. 

Mr. Mervin Beets, president of the Rotary club, stepped to the microphone and welcomed 
everyone. Prayer was required for any public event in Clanton, and in the new spirit of 
desegregation he had invited the Reverand Thurston Small, Miss Callie’s minister, to 
properly get things going. According to Stan, there were noticeably more blacks 
downtown that year. 

With such a crowd, Reverend Small could not be brief. He asked the Lord to bless 
everyone and everything at least twice. Loudspeakers were hanging from poles all around 
the courthouse, and his voice echoed throughout downtown. 

The first candidate was Timmy Joe Bullock, a terrified young man from Beat Four who 
wanted to serve as a constable. He walked across the flatbed trailer as if it were a 
gangplank, and when he stood behind the mike and looked at the crowd he almost fainted. 
He managed to utter his name, then reached into a pocket where he found his speech. He 
was not much of a reader, but in ten very long minutes managed to comment on the rise 
in crime, the recent murder trial, and the sniper. He didn’t like murderers and he was 
especially opposed to snipers. He would work to protect us from both. 

Applause was light when he finished. But at least he showed up. There were twenty-two 
candidates for constable in the five districts, but only seven had the courage to face the 
crowd. When we finally finished with the constables and the Justices of the Peace, 
Woody Gates and the Country Boys played a few bluegrass tunes and the crowd 
appreciated the break. 

At various places on the courthouse lawn, food and refreshments were being served. The 
Lions Club was giving away slices of cold watermelon. The ladies of the garden club 
were selling homemade ice cream. The Jaycees were barbecuing ribs. The crowd huddled 
under the ancient oak trees and hid from the sun. 

Mackey Don Coley had entered the race for Sheriff in late May. He had three opponents, 
the most popular of whom was a Clanton city policeman named T. R. Meredith. When 
Mr. Beets announced that it was time for the Sheriff candidates, the voters left the shade 
and swarmed around the trailer. 

Freck Oswald was running for the fourth time. In the prior three he had finished dead last; 
he appeared headed for the bottom again but seemed to enjoy the fun of it. He didn’t like 


President Nixon and said harsh things about his foreign policy, especially relations with 
China. The crowd listened but appeared to be a bit confused. 

Tryce McNatt was running for the second time. He began his remarks by saying, “I really 
don’t give a damn about China.” This was humorous but also stupid. Swearing in public, 
in the presence of ladies, would cost him many votes. Tryce was upset at the way 
criminals were being coddled by the system. He was opposed to any effort to build a new 
jail in Ford County—a waste of taxpayer money! He wanted harsh sentences and more 
prisons, even chain gangs and forced labor. 

I had heard nothing about a new jail. 

Because of the Kassellaw murder and the Hank Hooten rampage, violent crime was now 
out of control in Ford County, according to Tryce. We needed a new Sheriff, one who 
chased criminals, not befriended them. “Let’s clean up the county!” was his refrain. The 
crowd was with him. 

T. R. Meredith was a thirty-year veteran of law enforcement. He was an awful speaker 
but he was related to half the county, according to Stan. Stan knew about such things; he 
was related to the other half. “Meredith’ll win by a thousand votes in the runoff,” he 
predicted. This caused quite an argument among the other guests. 
Mackey Don went last. He had been the Sheriff since 1943, and wanted just one more 
term. “He’s been saying that for twenty years,” Stan said. Coley rambled on about his 
experience, his knowledge of the county and its people. When he finished, the applause 
was polite but certainly not encouraging. 

Two gentlemen were running for the office of tax collector, no doubt the least popular 
position in the county. As they spoke, the crowd drifted away again and headed for the 
ice cream and watermelons. I walked down to Harry Rex’s office, where another party 
was in progress on the sidewalk. 

The speeches continued throughout the afternoon. It was the summer of 1971, and by 
then at least fifty thousand young Americans had been killed in Vietnam. A similar 
gathering of people in any other part of the country would have turned into a virulent 
antiwar rally. The politicians would have been heckled off the stage. Flags and draft cards 
would’ve been burned. 

But Vietnam was never mentioned that Fourth of July. 

I’d had great fun at Syracuse demonstrating on campus and marching in the streets, but 
such activity was unheard of in the Deep South. It was a war; therefore real patriots were 
supportive. We were stopping Communism; the hippies and radicals and peaceniks up 
North and in California were simply afraid to fight. 


I bought a dish of strawberry ice cream from the garden ladies, and as I strolled around 
the courthouse I heard a commotion. From the third-floor window of the Bar Room, a 
prankster had dropped down an effigy of Baggy. The stuffed figure was hanging with its 
hands above its head—just like the real Baggy—and across its chest was a sign that said 
“SUGGS.” And to make sure everyone recognized the butt of the joke, an empty bottle of 
Jack Daniel’s protruded from each pants pocket. 

I had not seen Baggy that day, nor would I. Later, he claimed to know nothing about the 
incident. Not surprisingly, Wiley managed to take numerous photos of the effigy. 

“Theo’s here!” someone yelled, and this excited the crowd. Theo Morton was our 
longtime state senator. His district covered parts of four counties, and though he lived in 
Baldwin his wife was from Clanton. He owned two nursing homes and a cemetery, and 
he had the distinction of having survived three airplane crashes. He was no longer a pilot. 
Theo was colorful—blunt, sarcastic, hilarious, completely unpredictable on the stump. 
His opponent was a young man who’d just finished law school and was rumored to be 
grooming himself for Governor. Warren was his name, and Warren made the mistake of 
attacking Theo over some suspicious legislation that had been “sneaked through” the last 
session and increased the state’s support for nursing home patients. 

It was a bristling assault. I was standing in the crowd, watching Warren blast away, and 
just over his left shoulder I could see “SUGGS” hanging from the window. 

Theo began by introducing his wife, Rex Ella, a Mabry from right here in Clanton. He 
talked about her parents and her grandparents, and her aunts and uncles, and before long 
Theo had mentioned half the crowd. Clanton was his second home, his district, his people, 
the constituents he worked so hard to serve down in Jackson. 

It was smooth, fluid, off-the-cuff. I was listening to a master on the stump. 

He was chairman of the Highways Committee in the state senate, and for a few minutes 
he bragged about all the new roads he’d built in north Mississippi. His committee 
handled four hundred separate pieces of legislation each session. Four hundred! Four 
hundred bills, or laws. As chairman, he was responsible for writing laws. That’s what 
state senators did. They wrote good laws and killed bad laws. 

His young opponent had just finished law school, a notable accomplishment. He, Theo, 
didn’t get the chance to go to college because he was off fighting the Japs in World War 

II. But anyway, his young opponent had evidently neglected his study of the law. 
Otherwise, he would’ve passed the bar exam on the first try. 
Instead, “he flunked the bar exam, ladies and gentlemen!” 

With perfect timing, someone standing just behind young Warren yelled out, “That’s a 
damned lie!” The crowd looked at Warren as if he’d lost his mind. Theo turned to the 
voice and said incredulously, “A lie?” 


He reached into his pocket and whipped out a folded sheet of paper. “I’ve got the proof 
right here!” He pinched a corner of the paper and began waving it about. Without reading 
a single word of whatever was printed on it, he said, “How can we trust a man to write 
our laws when he can’t even pass the bar exam? Mr. Warren and I stand on equal 
footing—neither of us has ever passed the bar exam. Problem is, he had three years of 
law school to help him flunk it.” 

Theo’s supporters were yelping with laughter. Young Warren held his ground but wanted 
to bolt. 

Theo hammered away. “Maybe if he’d gone to law school in Mississippi instead of 
Tennessee then he’d understand our laws!” 

He was famous for such public butcherings. He’d once humiliated an opponent who’d 
left the pulpit under a cloud. Pulling an “affidavit” from his pocket, Theo claimed he had 
proof that the “ex-reverend” had an affair with a deacon’s wife. The affidavit was never 
read. 

The ten-minute limit meant nothing to Theo. He blew through it with a series of promises 
to cut taxes and waste and do something to make sure murderers got the death penalty 
more often. When he finally wound down, he thanked the crowd for twenty years of 
faithful support. He reminded us that in the last two elections the good folks of Ford 
County had given him, and Rex Ella, almost 80 percent of their votes. 

The applause was loud and long, and at some point Warren disappeared. So did I. I was 
tired of speeches and politics. 

*** 

Four weeks later, around dusk on the first Tuesday in August, much of the same crowd 
gathered around the courthouse for the vote counting. It had cooled off considerably; the 
temperature was only ninety-two with 98 percent humidity. 

The final days of the election had been a reporter’s dream. There was a fistfight between 
two Justice of the Peace candidates outside a black church. There were two lawsuits, both 
of which accused the other side of libel and slander and distributing phony sample ballots. 
One man was arrested when he was caught in the act of spray painting obscenities on one 
of Theo’s billboards. (As it turned out, after the election, the man had been hired by one 
of Theo’s henchmen to defile the senator’s signs. Young Warren still got the blame. “A 
common trick,” according to Baggy.) The state’s Attorney General was asked to 


investigate the high number of absentee ballots. “Typical election,” was Baggy’s 
summary. Things came to a peak on that Tuesday, and the entire county stopped to vote 
and enjoy the sport of a rural election. 

The polls closed at six, and an hour later the square was alive and wired with anticipation. 
People piled in from the county. They formed little groups around their candidate and 
even used campaign signs to stake off their territory. Many brought food and drink and 
most had folding lawn chairs as if they were there to watch a baseball game. Two 
enormous black chalkboards were placed side by side near the front door of the 
courthouse, and there the returns were tallied. 

“We have the results from North Karaway,” the clerk announced into a microphone so 
loud it could’ve been heard five miles away. The festive mood was immediately serious. 

“North Karaway’s always first,” Baggy said. It was almost eight-thirty, almost dark. We 
were sitting on the porch outside my office, waiting for the news. We planned to delay 
press time for twenty-four hours and publish our “Election Special” on Thursday. It took 
some time for the clerk to read the vote totals for every candidate for every office. 
Halfway through she said, “And in the Sheriff’s race.” Several thousand people held their 
breath. 

“Mackey Don Coley, eighty-four. Tryce McNatt, twenty-one. T. R. Meredith, sixty-two, 
and Freck Oswald, eleven.” A loud cheer went up on the far side of the lawn where 
Coley’s supporters were camped. 

“Coley’s always tough in Karaway,” Baggy said. “But he’s beat.” 

“He’s beat?” I asked. The first of twenty-eight precincts were in, and Baggy was already 
predicting winners. 

“Yep. For T.R. to run strong in a place where he has no base shows folks are fed up with 
Mackey Don. Wait’ll you see the Clanton boxes.” 

Slowly, the returns dribbled in, from places I’d never heard of: Pleasant Hill, Shady 
Grove, Klebie, Three Corners, Clover Hill, Green Alley, Possum Ridge, Massey Mill, 
Calico Ridge. Woody Gates and the Country Boys, who seemed to always be available, 
filled in the gaps with some bluegrass. 

The Padgitts voted at a tiny precinct called Dancing Creek. When the clerk announced 
the votes from there, and Coley got 31 votes and the other three got 8 combined, there 
was a refreshing round of boos from the crowd. Clanton East followed, the largest 
precinct and the one I voted in. Coley got 285 votes, Tryce 47, and when T.R.’s total of 
644 was announced, the place went wild. 

Baggy grabbed me and we celebrated with the rest of the town. Coley was going down 
without a runoff. 


As the losers slowly learned their fate, they and their supporters packed up and went 
home. Around eleven, the crowd was noticeably thinner. After midnight, I left the office 
and strolled around the square, taking in the sounds and images of this wonderful 
tradition. 

I was quite proud of the town. In the aftermath of a brutal murder and its baffling verdict, 
we had rallied, fought back, and spoken clearly that we would not tolerate corruption. 
The strong vote against Coley was our way of hitting at the Padgitts. For the second time 
in a hundred years, they would not own the Sheriff. 

T. R. Meredith got 61 percent of the vote, a stunning landslide. Theo got 82 percent, an 
old-fashioned shellacking. We printed eight thousand copies of our “Election Edition” 
and sold every one of them. I became a staunch believer in voting every year. Democracy 
at its finest. 
Chapter 28 

A week before Thanksgiving in 1971, Clanton was rocked by the news that one of its 
sons had been killed in Vietnam. Pete Mooney, a nineteen-year-old staff sergeant, was 
captured in an ambush near Hue, in central Vietnam. A few hours later his body was 
found. 

I didn’t know the Mooneys, but Margaret certainly did. She called me with the news and 
said she needed a few days off. Her family had lived down the street from the Mooneys 
for many years. Her son and Pete had been close friends since childhood. 

I spent some time in the archives and found the 1966 story of Marvin Lee Walker, a black 
kid who’d been the county’s first death in Vietnam. That had been before Mr. Caudle 
cared about such things, and the Times coverage of the event was shamefully sparse. 
Nothing on the front page. A hundred-word story on page three with no photo. At the 
time, Clanton had no idea where Vietnam was. 

So a young man who couldn’t go to the better schools, probably couldn’t vote, and more 
than likely was too afraid to drink from the public water fountain at the courthouse, had 
been killed in a country few people in his hometown could find on a map. And his death 
was the right and proper thing. Communists had to be fought wherever they might be 
found. 

Margaret quietly passed along the details I needed for a story. Pete had graduated from 
Clanton High School in 1970. He had played varsity football and baseball, lettering in 
both for three years. He was an honor student who had planned to work for two years, 


save his money, then go to college. He was unlucky enough to have a high draft number, 
and in December 1970 he got his notice. 

According to Margaret, and this was something I could not print, Pete had been very 
reluctant to report for basic training. He and his father had fought for weeks over the war. 
The son wanted to go to Canada and avoid the whole mess. The father was horrified that 
his son would be labeled a draft dodger. The family name would be ruined, etc. He called 
the kid a coward. Mr. Mooney had served in Korea and had zero patience for the antiwar 
movement. Mrs. Mooney tried the role of peacemaker, but in her heart, she too was 
reluctant to send her son off to such an unpopular war. Pete finally relented, and now he 
was coming home in a box. 

The funeral was at the First Baptist Church, where the Mooneys had been active for many 
years. Pete had been baptized there at the age of eleven, and this was of great comfort to 
his family and friends. He was now with the Lord, though still much too young to be 
called home. 

I sat with Margaret and her husband. It was my first and last funeral for a nineteen-yearold soldier. By concentrating on the casket, I could almost avoid the sobbing and, at times, 
wailing around me. His high school football coach gave a eulogy that drained every eye 
in the church, mine included. 

I could barely see the back of Mr. Mooney, in the front row. What unspeakable grief that 
poor man was suffering. 

After an hour, we escaped and made our way to the Clanton cemetery, where Pete was 
laid to rest with full military pomp and ceremony. When the lone bugler played “Taps,” 
the gut-wrenching cry of Pete’s mother made me shudder. She clung to the casket until 
they began to lower it. His father finally collapsed and was tended to by several deacons. 

What a waste, I said over and over as I walked the streets alone, headed generally back to 
the office. That night, still alone, I cursed myself for being so silent, so cowardly. I was 
the editor of the newspaper, dammit! Whether I felt entitled to the position or not, I was 
the only one in town. If I felt strongly about an issue, then I certainly had the power and 
position to editorialize. 

*** 

Pete Mooney was preceded in death by more than fifty thousand of his fellow 
countrymen, although the military did a rotten job of reporting an accurate count. 


In 1969, President Nixon and his National Security Adviser, Henry Kissinger, made the 
decision that the war in Vietnam could not be won, or, rather, that the United States 
would no longer try and win it. They kept this to themselves. They did not stop the draft. 
Instead, they pursued the cynical strategy of appearing to be confident of a successful 
outcome. 

From the time this decision was made until the end of the war in 1973, approximately 
eighteen thousand more men were killed, including Pete Mooney. 

I ran my editorial on the front page, bottom half, under a large photo of Pete in his Army 
uniform. It read: 

The death of Pete Mooney should make us ask the glaring question–Whatthe hell are we 
doing in Vietnam? A gifted student, talented athlete, school leader, future community 
leader, one of our best and brightest, gunned down at the edge of a river we’ve never 
heard of in a county we care little about. 

The official reason, one that goes back twenty years, is that we are there fighting 
Communism. If we see it spreading, then, in the words of ex-President Lyndon Johnson, 
we are to take “…all necessary measures to prevent farther aggression.” 

Korea, Vietnam. We now have troops in Laos and Cambodia, though President Nixon 
denies it. Where to next? Are we expected to send our sons anywhere and everywhere in 
the world tomeddle in the civil wars of others? 

Vietnamwas divided into two countries when the French were defeated there in 1954. 
North Vietnam is a poor country run by a Communist named Ho Chi Minh. South 
Vietnam is a poor country that was run by a brutal dictator named Ngo Dinh Diem until 
he was murdered in a coup in 1963. Since then the county has been run by the military. 

Vietnam has been in a state of war since 1946 when the French began their fateful 
attempt to keep out the Communists. Their failure was spectacular, so we rushed in to 
show how wars are supposed to be run. Our failure has been even grander than that of the 
French, and we’re not finished yet. 

How many more Pete Mooneys will die before our government decides to leave Vietnam 
to its own course? 

And how many other places around the world will we send our troops to fight 
Communism? 

What the hell are we doing in Vietnam? Right now we’re burying young soldiers while 
the politicians who are running the war contemplate getting out. 


Using bad language would be good for a few slaps on the wrist, but what did I care? 
Strong language was needed to give light to the blind patriots of Ford County. Before the 
flood of calls and letters, though, I made a friend. 

When I returned from Thursday lunch with Miss Callie (lamb stew indoors by the fire), 
Bubba Crockett was waiting in my office. He wore jeans, boots, a flannel shirt, long hair, 
and after he introduced himself he thanked me for the editorial. He had some things he 
wanted to get off his chest, and since I was as stuffed as a Christmas turkey, I placed my 
feet on my desk and listened for a long time. 

He’d grown up in Clanton, finished school here in 1966. His father owned the nursery 
two miles south of town; they were landscapers. He got his draft notice in 1967 and gave 
no thought to doing anything other than racing off to fight Communists. His unit landed 
in the south, just in time for the Tet Offensive. Two days on the ground, and he had lost 
three of his closest friends. 

The horror of fighting could not accurately be described, though Bubba was descriptive 
enough for me. Men burning, screaming for help, tripping over body parts, dragging 
bodies off the battlefield, hours with no sleep, no food, running out of ammo, seeing the 
enemy crawl toward you at night. His battalion lost a hundred men in the first five days. 
“After a week I knew I was going to die,” he said with wet eyes. “At that point, I became 
a pretty good soldier. You gotta reach that point to survive.” 

He was wounded twice, slight wounds that were treatable in field hospitals. Nothing that 
would get him home. He talked of the frustration of fighting a war that the government 
would not allow them to win. “We were better soldiers,” he said. “And our equipment 
was vastly superior. Our commanders were superb, but the fools in Washington wouldn’t 
let them fight a war.” 

Bubba knew the Mooney family and had begged Pete not to go. He had watched the 
burial service from a distance, and he cursed everybody he could see and many he could 
not. 

“These idiots around here still support the war, can you believe that?” he said. “More 
than fifty thousand dead and now we’re pulling out, and these people will argue with you 
on the streets of Clanton that it was a great cause.” 

“They don’t argue with you,” I said. 

“They do not. I’ve punched a couple of them. You play poker?” 

I did not, but I’d heard many colorful stories about various poker games around town. 
Quickly, I thought this might be interesting. “A little,” I said, figuring I could either find 
a rule book or get Baggy to teach me. 


“We play on Thursday nights, in a shed at the nursery. Several guys who fought over 
there. You might enjoy it.” 

“Tonight?” 

“Yeah, around eight. It’s a small game, some beer, some pot, some war stories. My 
buddies want to meet you.” 

“I’ll be there,” I said, wondering where I could find Baggy. 

*** 

Four letters were slid under the door that afternoon, all four scathing in their criticism of 
me and my criticism of the war. Mr. E. L. Green, a veteran of two wars, and a longtime 
subscriber to the Times, though that might soon change, said, among other things: 

If we don’t stop Communism it will spread to every corner of the world. One day it will 
be at our doorstep, and our children and grandchildren will ask us why we didn’t have the 
courage to stop it before it spread. 

Mr. Herbert Gillenwater’s brother was killed in the Korean conflict. He wrote: 

His death was a tragedy I still struggle with each day. But he was a soldier, a hero, a 
proud American, and his death helped stop the North Koreans and their allies, the Red 
Chinese and the Russians. When we are too afraid to fight, then we will ourselves be 
conquered. 

Mr. Felix Toliver from down in Shady Grove suggested that perhaps I’d spent too much 
time up North where folks were notoriously gun-shy. He said the military had always 
been dominated by brave young men from the South, and if I didn’t believe it then I 
should do some more research. There were a disproportionate number of Southern 
casualties in Korea and Vietnam. He concluded, rather eloquently: 


Our freedom was bought at the terrible price of the lives of countless brave soldiers. But 
what if we had been too afraid to fight? Hitler and the Japanese would still be in power. 
Much of the civilized world would be in ruins. We would be isolated and eventually 
destroyed. 

I planned to run every single letter to the editor, but I hoped there might be one or two in 
support of my editorial. The criticism didn’t bother me at all. I felt strongly that I was 
right. And I was developing a rather thick skin, a fine asset for an editor. 

*** 

After Baggy’s quick tutelage, I lost $100 playing poker with Bubba and the boys. They 
invited me back. 

There were five of us around the table, all in our mid-twenties. Three had served in 
Vietnam—Bubba, Darrell Radke, whose family owned the propane company, and Cedric 
Young, a black guy with a severe leg injury. The fifth player was Bubba’s older brother 
David, who had been rejected by the draft because of his eyesight, and who, I think, was 
there just for the marijuana. 

We talked a lot about drugs. None of the three veterans had seen or heard of pot or 
anything else prior to joining the Army. They laughed at the idea of drugs on the streets 
of Clanton in the 1960s. In Vietnam, drug use was rampant. Pot was smoked when they 
were bored and homesick, and it was smoked to calm their nerves in battle. The field 
hospitals loaded up the injured with the strongest painkillers available, and Cedric got 
hooked on morphine two weeks after being wounded. 

At their urging, I told a few drug stories from college, but I was an amateur among 
professionals. I don’t think they were exaggerating. No wonder we lost the war— 
everybody was stoned. 

They expressed great admiration for my editorial and great bitterness for having been 
sent over there. Each of the three had been scarred in some way; Cedric’s was obvious. 
Bubba’s and Darrel’s was more of a smoldering anger, a barely contained rage and desire 
to lash out, but at whom? 


Late in the game, they began swapping stories of gruesome battlefield scenes. I had heard 
that many soldiers refused to talk about their war experiences. Those three didn’t mind at 
all. It was therapeutic. 

They played poker almost every Thursday night, and I was always welcome. When I left 
them at midnight, they were still drinking, still smoking pot, still talking about Vietnam. 
I’d had enough of the war for one day. 

Chapter 29 

The following week I devoted an entire page to the war controversy I had created. It was 
covered with letters to the editor, seventeen in all, only two of which were even 
somewhat supportive of my antiwar feelings. I was called a Communist, a liberal, a 
traitor, a carpetbagger, and, the worst, a coward because I had not worn the uniform. 
Every letter was proudly signed, no anonymous mail that week; these folks were fired-up 
patriots who disliked me and wanted the county to know it. 

I didn’t care. I had stirred up a hornet’s nest and the town was at least debating the war. 
Most of the debates were one-sided, but I had aroused strong feelings. 

The response to those seventeen letters was astounding. A group of high school students 
came to my rescue with a hand-delivered batch of their own. They were passionately 
against the war, had no plans to go fight in it, and, furthermore, found it odd that most of 
the letters the prior week were from folks too old for the armed forces. “It’s our blood, 
not yours,” was my favorite line. 

Many of the students singled out particular letters I’d printed and went after them with a 
hatchet. Becky Jenkins was offended by Mr. Robert Earl Huff’s statement that “…our 
nation was built by the blood of our soldiers. Wars will always be with us.” 

She responded: “Wars will be with us as long as ignorant and greedy men try to impose 
their will on others.” 

Kirk Wallace took exception to Mrs. Mattie Louise Ferguson’s rather exhaustive 
description of me. In his final paragraph he wrote, “Sadly, Mrs. Ferguson would not 
know a Communist, a liberal, a traitor, or a carpetbagger if she met one. Life out in 
Possum Ridge protects her from such people.” 

The following week, I devoted yet another full page to the thirty-one letters from the 
students. There were also three late arrivals from the warmongering crowd, and I printed 
them too. The response was another flood of letters, all of which I printed. 


Through the pages of the Times, we fought the war until Christmas when everyone 
suddenly called a truce and settled in for the holidays. 

*** 

Mr. Max Hocutt died on New Year’s Day 1972. Gilma knocked on my apartment 
window early that morning and eventually got me to the door. I’d been asleep for less 
than five hours, and I needed a full day of hard sleep. Maybe two. 

I followed her into the old mansion, my first visit inside in many months, and I was 
shocked at how badly it was deteriorating. But there were more urgent matters. We 
walked to the main stairway in the front foyer where Wilma joined us. She pointed a 
crooked and wrinkled finger upward and said, “He’s up there. First door on the right. 
We’ve already been up once this morning.” 

Once a day up the stairs was their limit. They now were in their late seventies, and not far 
behind Mr. Max. 

He was lying in a large bed with a dirty white sheet pulled up to his neck. His skin was 
the color of the sheet. I stood beside him for a moment to make sure he wasn’t breathing. 
I had never been called upon to pronounce someone dead, but this was not a close call— 
Mr. Max looked as though he’d been dead for a month. 

I walked back down the stairs where Wilma and Gilma were waiting right where I’d left 
them. They looked at me as if I might have a different diagnosis. 

“I’m afraid he’s dead,” I said. 

“We know that,” Gilma said. 

“Tell us what to do,” Wilma said. 

This was the first corpse I’d been called upon to process, but the next step seemed pretty 
obvious. “Well, perhaps we should call Mr. Magargel down at the funeral home.” 

“I told you so,” Wilma said to Gilma. 

They didn’t move, so I went to the phone and called Mr. Magargel. “It’s New Year’s 
Day,” he said. It was apparent my call had awakened him. 

“He’s still dead,” I said. 


‘Are you sure?”
“Yes, I’m sure. I just saw him.”
“Where is he?”
“In bed. He went peacefully.”
“Sometimes these old geezers are just sleeping soundly, you know.”
I turned away from the twins so they wouldn’t hear me argue about whether their brother


was really dead. “He’s not sleeping, Mr. Magargel. He’s dead.”
“I’ll be there in an hour.”
“Is there anything else we should do?” I asked.
“Like what?”
“I don’t know. Notify the police, something like that?”
“Was he murdered?”
“No.”
“Why would you want to call the police?”
“Sorry I asked.”
They invited me into the kitchen for a cup of instant coffee. On the counter was a box of


Cream of Wheat, and beside it a large bowl of the cereal, mixed and ready to eat.


Evidently, Wilma or Gilma had prepared breakfast for their brother, and when he didn’t


come down they went after him. 

The coffee was undrinkable until I poured in sugar. They sat across the narrow prep table, 
watching me curiously. Their eyes were red, but they were not crying. 

“We can’t live here,” Wilma said, with the finality that came from years of discussion. 
“We want you to buy the place,” Gilma added. One barely finished a sentence before the 
other started another one. 

“We sell it to you…” 

“For a hundred thousand…” 


“We take the money…” 

“And move to Florida…” 

“Florida?” I asked. 

“We have a cousin there…” 

“She lives in a retirement village…” 

“It’s very lovely…” 

“And they take such good care of you…” 

“And Melberta is nearby.” 

Melberta? I thought she was still around the house somewhere, sneaking through the 
shadows. They explained that they had placed her in a “home” a few months back. The 
“home” was somewhere north of Tampa. That’s where they wanted to go and spend the 
rest of their days. Their beloved mansion was simply too much for them to maintain. 
They had bad hips, bad knees, bad eyes. They climbed the stairs once a day—“twentyfour steps” Gilma informed me—and were terrified of falling down and killing 
themselves. There wasn’t enough money to make it safe, and what money they had they 
didn’t want to waste on housekeepers, grass-cutters, and, now, a driver. 

“We want you to buy the Mercedes too…” 

“We don’t drive, you know…” 

“Max always took us…” 

Once in a while, just for fun, I would sneak a glance at the odometer of Max’s Mercedes. 
He was averaging less than a thousand miles per year. Unlike the house, the car was in 
mint condition. 

The house had six bedrooms, four floors and a basement, four or five bathrooms, living 
and dining rooms, library, kitchen, wide sweeping porches that were falling in, and an 
attic that I felt certain was crammed with family treasures buried there centuries ago. It 
would take months just to clean it before the remodelers moved in. A hundred thousand 
dollars was a low price for such a mansion, but there were not enough newspapers sold in 
the entire state to renovate the place. 

And what about all those animals? Cats, birds, rabbits, squirrels, goldfish, the place was a 
regular zoo. 


I had been looking at real estate, but, frankly, I’d been so spoiled by paying them $50 a 
month that I found it hard to leave. I was twenty-four years old, very single, and I was 
having a grand time watching the money accumulate in the bank. Why would I risk 
financial ruin by buying that money pit? 

I bought it two days after the funeral. 

*** 

On a cold, wet Thursday in February, I pulled to a stop in front of the Ruffin residence in 
Lowtown. Esau was waiting on the porch. “You trade cars?” he asked, looking at the 
street. 

“No, I still have the little one,” I said. “That was Mr. Hocutt’s.” 

“Thought it was black.” There were very few Mercedes in Ford County and it was not 
difficult keeping track of them. 

“It needed painting,” I said. It was now a dark maroon. I had to cover the knives Mr. 
Hocutt had painted on both front doors, and so while it was in the shop I decided to go 
with a different color altogether. 

Word was out that I had somehow swindled the Hocutts out of their Mercedes. In fact, I 
had paid blue-book value for it—$9,500. The purchase was approved by Judge Reuben V. 
Atlee, the longtime chancellor in Ford County. He also approved my purchase of the 
house for $100,000, an apparently low figure that looked much better after two courtappointed appraisers gave their estimates at $75,000 and $85,000. One reported that any 
renovation of the Hocutt House would “…involve extensive and unforeseen 
expenditures.” 

Harry Rex, my lawyer, made sure I saw this language. 

Esau was subdued, and things did not improve inside. The house, as always, simmered in 
the sauce of some delicious beast she was roasting in the oven. Today it would be rabbit. 

I hugged Miss Callie and knew something was terribly wrong. Esau picked up an 
envelope and said, “This is a draft notice. For Sam.” He tossed it on the table for me to 
see, then left the kitchen. 

Talk was slow over lunch. They were subdued, preoccupied, and very confused. Esau at 
times felt the proper thing to do was for Sam to honor whatever commitment his country 


required. Miss Callie felt like she had already lost Sam once. The thought of losing him 
again was unbearable. 

That night I called Sam and gave him the bad news. He was in Toledo spending a few 
days with Max. We talked for over an hour, and I was relentless in my conviction that he 
had no business going to Vietnam. Fortunately, Max felt the same way. 

Over the course of the next week, I spent hours on the phone with Sam, Bobby, Al, Leon, 
Max, and Mario, as we shared our views about what Sam should do. Neither he nor any 
of his brothers believed the war was just, but Mario and Al felt strongly that it was wrong 
to break the law. I was by far the biggest dove in the bunch, with Bobby and Leon 
somewhere in the middle. Sam seemed to twist in the wind and change daily. It was a 
gut-wrenching decision, but as the days dragged on he appeared to spend more time 
talking to me. The fact that he had been on the run for two years helped immensely. 

After two weeks of soul-searching, Sam slipped into the underground and surfaced in 
Ontario. He called collect one night and asked me to tell his parents he was okay. Early 
the next morning, I drove to Lowtown and delivered the news to Esau and Miss Callie 
that their youngest son had just made the smartest decision of his life. 

To them, Canada seemed like a million miles away. Not nearly as far as Vietnam, I told 
them. 

Chapter 30 

The second contractor I hired to transform the Hocutt House was Mr. Lester Klump from 
out in Shady Grove. He had been highly recommended by Baggy, who, of course, knew 
exactly how to restore a mansion. Stan Atcavage at the bank also recommended Mr. 
Klump, and since Stan held the mortgage for $100,000 I listened to him. 

The first contractor had failed to show, and when I called after waiting for three days his 
phone had been disconnected. An ominous sign. 

Mr. Klump and his son, Lester Junior, spent days going over the house. They were 
terrified of the project, and knew it would be a regular nightmare if anybody got in a 
hurry, especially me. They were slow and methodical, even talked slower than most folks 
in Ford County, and I soon realized that everything they did was in second gear. I 
probably didn’t help matters by explaining that I was already living in very comfortable 
quarters on the premises; thus I wasn’t going to be homeless if they didn’t hurry up. 

Their reputation was that they were sober and generally finished on time. This put them 
at the top of the heap in the world of remodeling. 


After a few days of scratching our heads and kicking at the gravel, we agreed on a plan 
whereby they would bill me weekly for their labor and supplies, and I would add 10 
percent for their “overhead,” which I hoped meant profit. It took a week of cursing to get 
Harry Rex to draft a contract reflecting this. At first he refused and called me all sorts of 
colorful names. 

The Klumps would begin with the cleanup and demolition, then do the roof and porches. 
When that was over, we’d sit down and plan the next phase. In April 1972 the project 
began. 

At least one of the Klumps appeared every day with a crew. They spent the first month 
scattering all the varmints and wildlife that had made the property home for decades. 

*** 

A carload of high school seniors was stopped by a state trooper a few hours after their 
graduation. The car was full of beer, and the trooper, a rookie fresh from school where 
they had alerted them to such things, smelled something odd. Drugs had finally made it to 
Ford County. 

There was marijuana in the car. All six students were charged with felony possession and 
every other crime the cops could possibly throw at them. The town was shocked—how 
could our innocent little community get infiltrated with drugs? How could we stop it? I 
low-keyed the story in the paper; no sense beating up on six good kids who’d made a 
mistake. Sheriff Meredith was quoted as saying that his office would act decisively to 
“remove this scourge” from our community. “This ain’t California,” he said. 

Typically, everybody in Clanton was suddenly on the lookout for drug dealers, though no 
one was quite sure what they looked like. 

Because the cops were on high alert, and would love nothing more than another drug bust, 
poker the next Thursday was moved to a different location, one deep in the country. 
Bubba Crockett and Darrell Radke lived in a dilapidated old cabin with a nonpokerplaying veteran named Ollie Hinds. They called their place the Foxhole. It was hidden in 
a heavily wooded ravine at the end of a dirt road that you couldn’t find in broad daylight. 

Ollie Hinds was suffering from every manner of postwar trauma and probably several 
prewar ones as well. He was from Minnesota and had served with Bubba and survived 
their horrible nightmares. He had been shot, burned, captured briefly, escaped, and finally 
sent home when an Army shrink said he was in need of serious help. Apparently he never 


got it. When I met him he was shirtless, revealing scars and tattoos, and glassy-eyed, 
which, I would soon learn, was his usual condition. 

I was grateful he was not playing poker. A couple of bad hands, and you got the 
impression he might pull an M-16 and even the score. 

The drug bust, and the town’s reaction to it, was the source of much humor and ridicule. 
Folks were acting as though the six teenagers were the very first drug users, and since 
they’d been caught then the county was on top of the crisis. With some vigilance and 
tough talk, the plague of illegal drugs could be diverted to another part of the country. 

Nixon had mined the harbor at Haiphong and was bombing Hanoi with a fury. I brought 
this up to get a reaction, but there was little interest in the war that night. 

Darrell had heard a rumor that some black kid from Clanton had been drafted and fled to 
Canada. I said nothing. 

“Smart boy,” Bubba said. “Smart boy.” 

The conversation soon returned to drugs. At one point Bubba admired his marijuana 
cigarette and said, “Man, this is really smooth. Didn’t come from the Padgitts.” 

“Came from Memphis,” Darrell said. “Mexican.” 

Since I knew zero about the local drug supply routes, I listened intently for a few seconds 
then, when it was evident no one would pursue the conversation, said, “I thought the 
Padgitts produced pretty good stuff.” 

“They should stick to moonshine,” Bubba said. 

“It’s okay,” Darrell said, “if you can’t get anything else. They struck it rich a few years 
back. They started growin’ long before anybody else around here. Now they got 
competition.” 

“I hear they’re cuttin’ back, goin’ back to whiskey and stealin’ cars,” Bubba said. 

“Why?” I asked. 

“A lot more narcs now. State, federal, local. They got helicopters and surveillance stuff. 
Ain’t like Mexico where nobody gives a shit what you grow.” 

Gunfire erupted outside, not too far away. The others were not fazed by it. “What might 
that be?” I asked. 

“It’s Ollie,” Darrell said. “After a possum. He puts on night-vision goggles, takes his M16, goes lookin’ for varmints and such. Calls it gook huntin’.” 


I luckily lost three hands in a row and found the perfect moment to say good night. 

*** 

After much delay, the Supreme Court of Mississippi finally affirmed the conviction of 
Danny Padgitt. Four months earlier it had ruled, by a majority of six to three, that the 
conviction would stand. Lucien Wilbanks filed a petition for rehearing, which was 
granted. Harry Rex thought that might signal trouble. 

The appeal was reheard, and almost two years after his trial the court finally settled the 
matter. The vote to affirm the conviction was five to four. 

The dissent bought into Lucien’s rather vociferous argument that Ernie Gaddis had been 
given too much freedom in abusing Danny Padgitt on cross-examination. With his 
leading questions about the presence of Rhoda’s children in the bedroom, watching the 
rape, Ernie had effectively been allowed to place before the jury highly prejudicial facts 
that simply were not in evidence. 

Harry Rex had read all the briefs and monitored the appeal for me, and he was concerned 
that Wilbanks had a legitimate argument. If five justices believed it, then the case would 
be sent back to Clanton for another trial. On the one hand another trial would be good for 
the newspaper. On the other, I didn’t want the Padgitts off their island and running 
around Clanton causing trouble. 

In the end, though, only four justices dissented, and the case was over. I plastered the 
good news across the front of the Times and hoped I would never again hear the name of 
Danny Padgitt. 

Part Three 

Chapter 31 


Five years and two months after Lester Klump, Sr… and Lester Klump, Jr… first set foot 
in the Hocutt House, they finished the renovation. The ordeal was over, and the results 
were splendid. 

Once I accepted their languid pace, I settled in for the long haul and worked hard selling 
ad copy. Twice, during the last year of the project, I had unwisely attempted to live in the 
house and somehow exist in the midst of the debris. In doing so I had little trouble with 
the dust, the paint fumes, the blocked hallways, the erratic electricity and hot water, and 
the absence of heating and air conditioning, but I could never adapt to the early morning 
hammers and handsaws. They were not early birds, which, as I learned, was unusual for 
contractors, but they did start in earnest each morning by eight-thirty. I really enjoyed 
sleeping until ten. The arrangement didn’t work, and after each attempt to live in the big 
house I sneaked back across the gravel drive and returned to the apartment, where things 
were somewhat quieter. 

Only once in five years was I unable to pay the Klumps on time. I refused to borrow 
money for the project, though Stan Atcavage was always ready to loan it. After work 
each Friday I would sit down with Lester Senior, usually on a makeshift plywood table in 
a hallway, and over a cold beer we would tally up the labor and materials for the week, 
add 10 percent, and I would write him a check. I filed his records away, and for the first 
two years kept a running total of the cost of the renovation. After two years, though, I 
stopped adding the weekly to the cumulative. I didn’t want to know what it was costing. 

I was broke but I didn’t care. The money pit had been sealed off; I had teetered on the 
brink of insolvency, dodged it, and now I could begin stashing it away again. 

And I had something magnificent to show for the time, effort, and investment. The house 
had been built around 1900 by Dr. Miles Hocutt. It had a distinctive Victorian style, with 
two high gabled roofs in the front, a turret that ran up four levels, and wide covered 
porches that swept around the house on both sides. Over the years the Hocutts had 
painted the house blue and yellow, and Mr. Klump, Sr… had even found an area of bright 
red under three coats of newer paint. I played it safe and stayed with white and beige and 
light brown trim. The roof was copper. Outside it was a rather plain Victorian, but I 
would have years to jazz it up. 

Inside, the heart-pine floors on all three levels had been restored to their original beauty. 
Walls had been removed, rooms and hallways opened up. The Klumps had finally been 
forced to remove the entire kitchen and build another from the basement up. The 
fireplace in the living room had actually collapsed under the pressure of relentless jackhammering. I turned the library into a den and knocked out more walls so that upon 
entering the front foyer you could see through the den to the kitchen in the distance. I 
added windows everywhere; the house had originally been built like a cave. 

Mr. Klump admitted he had never tasted champagne, but he happily chugged it down as 
we completed our little ceremony on a side porch. I handed him what I hoped would be 


his last check, we shook hands, posed for a photograph by Wiley Meek, then popped the 
cork. 

Many of the rooms were bare; it would take years to properly decorate the place, and it 
would require the assistance of someone with far more knowledge and taste than I 
possessed. Half-empty, though, the house was still spectacular. It needed a party! 

I borrowed $2,000 from Stan and ordered wine and champagne from Memphis. I found a 
suitable caterer from Tupelo. (The only one in Clanton specialized in ribs and catfish and 
I wanted something a bit classier.) 

The official invitation list of three hundred included everybody I knew in town, and a few 
I did not. The unofficial list was comprised of those who’d heard me say, “We’ll have a 
huge party when it’s finished.” I invited BeeBee and three of her friends from Memphis. I 
invited my father but he was too worried about inflation and the bond market. I invited 
Miss Callie and Esau, Reverend Thurston Small, Claude, three clerks from the 
courthouse, two schoolteachers, an assistant basketball coach, a teller at the bank, and the 
newest lawyer in town. That made a total of twelve blacks, and I would’ve invited more 
if I had known more. I was determined to have the first integrated party in Clanton. 

Harry Rex brought moonshine and a large platter of chitlins that almost broke up the 
festivities. Bubba Crockett and the Foxhole gang arrived stoned and ready to party. Mr. 
Mitlo wore the only tuxedo. Piston made an appearance, and was seen leaving through 
the back door with a carry-out bag filled with rather expensive finger food. Woody Gates 
and the Country Boys played for hours on a side porch. The Klumps were there with all 
their laborers; it was a fine moment for them and I made sure they got all the credit. 
Lucien Wilbanks arrived late and was soon in a heated argument about politics with 
Senator Theo Morton, whose wife, Rex Ella, told me it was the grandest party she’d seen 
in Clanton in twenty years. Our new Sheriff, Tryce McNatt, dropped by with several of 
his uniformed deputies. (T. R. Meredith had died of colon cancer the year before.) One of 
my favorites, Judge Reuben V Atlee, held court in the den with colorful stories about Dr. 
Miles Hocutt. Reverend Millard Stark of the First Baptist Church stayed only ten minutes 
and left quietly when he realized alcohol was being served. Reverend Cargrove of the 
First Presbyterian Church was seen drinking champagne, and appeared to have a taste for 
it. Baggy passed out in a second-floor bedroom, where I found him the next afternoon. 
The Stukes twins, who owned the hardware store, showed up in brand-new, matching 
overalls. They were seventy years old, lived together, never married, and wore matching 
overalls every day. There was no dress requirement; the invitation said, “Open Attire.” 

The front lawn was covered with two large white tents, and at times the crowd spilled 
from under them. The party began at 1 P.M… Saturday afternoon, and would’ve gone 
past midnight if the wine and food had lasted. By ten, Woody Gates and his band were 
exhausted, there was nothing left to drink but a few warm beers, nothing to eat but a few 
tortilla chips, and nothing left to see. The house had been thoroughly seen and enjoyed. 


Late the next morning, I scrambled eggs for BeeBee and her friends. We sat on the front 
porch and drank coffee and admired the mess made just hours before. It took me a week 
to clean up. 

*** 

Through the years in Clanton I’d heard plenty of horror stories of imprisonment at the 
state penitentiary at Parchman. It was in sprawling farmland in the Delta, the richest 
farming region in the state, two hours west of Clanton. Living conditions were 
wretched—cramped barracks that were suffocating in the summer and frigid in the winter, 
ghastly food, scant medical care, a slave system, brutal sex. Forced labor, sadistic guards, 
the list was endless and pathetic. 

When I thought of Danny Padgitt, which I did often, I was always comforted by the belief 
that he was at Parchman getting what he deserved. He was lucky he hadn’t been strapped 
to a chair in a gas chamber. 

My assumption was wrong. 

In the late sixties, in an effort to ease the overcrowding at Parchman, the state had built 
two satellite prisons, or “camps” as they were known. The plan had been to place a 
thousand nonviolent offenders in more civilized confinement. They would obtain job 
training, even qualify for work release. One such satellite was near the small town of 
Broom-field, three hours south of Clanton. 

Judge Loopus died in 1972. During the Padgitt trial, his stenographer had been a homely 
young woman named Darla Clabo. She worked for Loopus for a few years, and after his 
death left the area. When she walked into my office late one afternoon in the summer of 
1977, I knew I had seen her somewhere in the distant past. 

Darla introduced herself and I quickly remembered where I’d seen her. For five straight 
days during the Padgitt trial she had sat below the bench, next to the exhibit table, taking 
down every word. She was now living in Alabama, and had driven five hours to tell me 
something. First, she swore me to absolute secrecy. 

Her hometown was Broomfield. Two weeks earlier she had been visiting her mother 
when she saw a familiar face walking down the sidewalk around lunchtime. It was Danny 
Padgitt, strolling along with a buddy. She was so startled she tripped on the edge of a 
curb and almost fell into the street. 


They walked into a local diner and sat down for lunch. Darla saw them through a window, 
and decided not to go in. There was a chance Padgitt might recognize her, though she 
wasn’t sure why that frightened her. 

The man with him wore the uniform that was common in Broom-field—navy slacks, a 
short-sleeved white shirt with the words “Broomfield Correctional Facility” in very small 
letters over the pocket. He also wore black cowboy boots and no gun whatsoever. She 
explained that some of the guards who handled the prisoners on work release had the 
option of carrying a weapon. It was hard to imagine a white man in Mississippi 
voluntarily declining to carry a gun if given the option, but she suspected that perhaps 
Danny didn’t want his own personal guard to be armed. 

Danny was wearing white dungarees and a white shirt, possibly issued by the camp. The 
two enjoyed a long lunch and appeared to be good friends. From her car, Darla watched 
them leave the diner. She followed from a distance as they took a leisurely stroll for a few 
blocks until Danny entered a building that housed the regional office of the Mississippi 
Highway Department. The guard got into a camp vehicle and drove away. 

The following morning, Darla’s mother entered the building under the pretext of filing a 
complaint about a road in need of repair. She was rudely informed that no such procedure 
existed, and in the ensuing brouhaha managed to catch a glimpse of the young man Dark 
had carefully described. He was holding a clipboard and appeared to be just another 
useless pencil pusher. 

Darla’s mother had a friend whose son worked as a clerk at the Broomfield camp. He 
confirmed that Danny Padgitt had been moved there in the summer of 1974. 

When she finished with the story, she said, “Are you going to expose him?” 

I was reeling, but I could already see the story. “I will investigate,” I said. “Depends on 
what I find.” 

“Please do. This ain’t right.” 

“It’s unbelievable.” 

“That little punk should be on death row.” 

“I agree.” 

“I did eight murder trials for Judge Loopus, and that one really sticks with me.” 

“Me too.” 

She swore me to secrecy again, and left her address. She wanted a copy of the paper if we 
did the story. 


***


At six the next morning I had no trouble jumping out of bed. Wiley and I drove to 
Broomfield. Since both the Spitfire and the Mercedes were likely to draw attention in any 
small town in Mississippi, we took his Ford pickup. We easily found the camp, three 
miles out of town. We found the highway department office building. At noon we took 
our positions along Main Street. Since Padgitt would certainly recognize either one of us, 
we faced the challenge of trying to hide on a busy street in a strange town without acting 
suspicious. Wiley sat low in his truck, camera loaded and ready. I hid behind a newspaper 
on a bench. 

There was no sign of him the first day. We drove back to Clanton, then early the next 
morning left again for Broomfield. At eleven-thirty, a prison vehicle stopped in front of 
the office building. The guard went inside, collected his prisoner, and they walked to 
lunch. 

*** 

On July 17, 1977, our front page had four large photos—one of Danny walking along the 
sidewalk sharing a laugh with the guard, one of them as they entered the City Grill, one 
of the office building, one of the gate to the Broomfield camp. My headline howled: NO 
PRISON FOR PADGITT—HE’S OFF AT CAMP. 

My report began: 

Four years after being convicted of the brutal rape and murder of Rhoda Kassellaw, and 
being sentenced to life in the state penitentiary at Parchman, Danny Padgitt was moved to 
the state’s new satellite camp at Broomfield. After three years there, he enjoys all the 
perks of a well-connected inmate–an office job with the state highway department, his 
own personal guard, and long lunches (cheeseburgers and milk shakes) in local cafes 
where the other patrons have never heard of him or his crimes. 


The story was as venomous and slanted as I could possibly make it. I bullied the waitress 
at the City Grill into telling me that he had just eaten a cheeseburger with french fries, 
that he ate there three times a week, and that he always picked up the check. I made a 
dozen phone calls to the highway department until I found a supervisor who knew 
something about Padgitt. The supervisor refused to answer questions, and I made him 
sound like a criminal himself. Penetrating Broomfield camp was just as frustrating. I 
detailed my efforts and tilted the story so it sounded as though all the bureaucrats were 
covering up for Padgitt. No one at Parchman knew a damned thing, or if they did they 
were unwilling to talk about it. I called the highway commissioner (an elected official), 
the warden at Parchman (thankfully an appointed position), the Attorney General, the 
Lieutenant Governor, and finally the Governor himself. They were all too busy, of course, 
so I chatted with their bootlickers and made them sound like morons. 

Senator Theo Morton appeared to be shocked. He promised to get right to the bottom of it 
and call me back. At press time, I was still waiting. 

The reaction in Clanton was mixed. Many of those who called or stopped me on the street 
were angry and wanted something done. They truly believed that when Padgitt had been 
sentenced to life and led away in handcuffs, that he would spend the rest of his days in 
hell at Parchman. A few seemed indifferent and wanted to forget Padgitt altogether. He 
was old news. 

And among some there was the frustrating, almost cynical lack of surprise. They figured 
the Padgitts had worked their magic once more, found the right pockets, pulled the right 
strings. Harry Rex was in this camp. “What’s the big fuss, boy? They’ve bought 
Governors before.” 

The photo of Danny walking down the street, free as a bird, frightened Miss Callie 
considerably. “She didn’t sleep last night,” Esau mumbled to me when I arrived for lunch 
that Thursday. “I wish you hadn’t found him.” 

*** 

Fortunately, the Memphis and Jackson newspapers picked up the story, and it took on a 
life of its own. They turned up the heat to a point where the politicians had to get 
involved. The Governor and the Attorney General, along with Senator Morton, were soon 
jockeying to lead the parade to get the boy sent back to Parchman. 

Two weeks after I broke the story, Danny Padgitt was “reassigned” to the state 
penitentiary. 


The next day, I received two phone calls, one at the office, one at home while I was 
asleep. Different voices, but with the same message. I was a dead man. 

I notified the FBI in Oxford, and two agents visited me in Clanton. I leaked this to a 
reporter in Memphis, and soon the town knew that I had been threatened, and that the FBI 
was investigating. For a month, Sheriff McNatt kept a patrol car in front of my office 
around the clock. Another one sat in my driveway during the night. 

After a seven-year hiatus, I was carrying a gun again. 

Chapter 32 

There was no immediate bloodshed. The threats were not forgotten, but as time passed 
they became less ominous. I never stopped carrying a gun—it was always within reach— 
but I lost interest in it. I found it hard to believe that the Padgitts would risk the severe 
backlash that would come if they knocked off the editor of the local paper. Even if the 
town was not entirely enamored of me, as opposed to someone as beloved as Mr. Caudle, 
the uproar would create more pressure than the Padgitts were willing to risk. 

They kept to themselves like never before. After the defeat of Mackey Don Coley in 1971, 
they once again proved quite adept at changing tactics. Danny had given them enough 
unwanted attention; they were determined to avoid anymore. They retrenched even 
deeper into Padgitt Island. They increased security in the wasted belief that the next 
sheriff, T. R. Meredith, or his successor, Tryce McNatt, might come after them. They 
grew their crops and smuggled them off the island in planes, boats, pickups, and flatbed 
trucks ostensibly loaded with timber. 

With typical Padgitt shrewdness, and sensing that the marijuana business might become 
too risky, they began pumping money into legitimate enterprises. They bought a highway 
contracting company and quickly turned it into a reliable bidder for government projects. 
They bought an asphalt plant, a Redi-Mix concrete plant, and gravel pits around the 
northern part of the state. Highway construction was a notably corrupt business in 
Mississippi, and the Padgitts knew how to play the game. 

I watched these activities as closely as possible. This was before the Freedom of 
Information Act and open-meetings laws. I knew the names of some of the companies the 
Padgitts had bought, but it was virtually impossible to keep up with them. There was 
nothing I could print, no story, because on the surface it was all legitimate. 


I waited, but for what I wasn’t certain. Danny Padgitt would return one day, and when he 
did he might simply disappear into the island and never be seen again. Or he might do 
otherwise. 

*** 

Few people in Clanton did not attend church. Those who did seemed to know exactly 
which ones did not, and there was a common invitation to “come worship with us.” The 
farewell, “See you on Sunday,” was almost as common as “Y’all come see us.” 

I got hammered with these invitations during my first years in town. Once it was known 
that the owner and editor of the Times did not go to church, I became the most famous 
derelict in town. I decided to do something about it. 

Each week Margaret put together our Religion page, which included a rather extensive 
menu of churches arranged by denominations. There were also a few ads by the more 
affluent congregations. And notices for revivals, reunions, potluck suppers, and countless 
other activities. 

Working from this page, and from the phonebook, I made a list of all the churches in 
Ford County. The total was eighty-eight, but it was a moving target since congregations 
were always splitting, folding here and popping up over there. My goal was to visit each 
one of them, something I was sure had never been done, and a feat that would put me in a 
class by myself among churchgoers. 

The denominations were varied and baffling how could Protestants, all of whom claimed 
to follow the same basic tenets, get themselves so divided? They agreed basically that 
(l)Jesus was the only son of God; (2) he was born of a virgin; (3) lived a perfect life; (4) 
was persecuted by the Jews, arrested and crucified by the Romans; (5) that he arose on 
the third day and later ascended into heaven; (6) and some believed—though there were 
many variations—that one must follow Jesus in baptism and faith to make it to heaven. 

The doctrine was fairly straightforward, but the devil was in the details. 

There were no Catholics, Episcopalians, or Mormons. The county was heavily Baptist, 
but they were a fractured bunch. The Pentecostals were in second place, and evidently 
they had fought with themselves as much as the Baptists. 

In 1974, I’d begun my epic adventure to visit every church in Ford County. The first had 
been the Calvary Full Gospel, a rowdy Pentecostal assemblage on a gravel road two 
miles out of town. As advertised, the service began at ten-thirty, and I found a spot on the 


back pew, as far away from the action as I could get. I was greeted warmly and word 
spread that a bona-fide visitor was present. I did not recognize anyone there. Preacher 
Bob wore a white suit, navy shirt, white tie, and his thick black hair was wound around 
and plastered tightly at the base of his skull. People started hollering when he was giving 
the announcements. They waved their hands and shouted during a solo. When the sermon 
finally began an hour later, I was ready to leave. It lasted for fifty-five minutes, and left 
me confused and exhausted. At times the building shook with folks stomping the floor. 
Windows rattled as they were overcome with the spirit and yelled upward. Preacher Bob 
“laid hands” on three sick folks suffering vague diseases, and they claimed to be healed. 
At one point a deacon stood and in an astounding display began uttering something in a 
tongue I had never heard. He clenched his fists, closed his eyes tightly, and let loose with 
a steady, fluent flow of words. It was not an act; he wasn’t faking. After a few minutes, a 
young girl in the choir stood and began translating into English. It was a vision God was 
sending through the deacon. There were those present with unforgiven sins. 

“Repent!” Preacher Bob shouted, and heads ducked. 

What if the deacon was talking about me? I glanced around and noticed that the door was 
locked and guarded by two more deacons. 

Things finally ran out of gas, and two hours after I sat down I bolted from the building. I 
needed a drink. 

I wrote a pleasant little report about my visit to Calvary Full Gospel and ran it on the 
Religion page. I commented on the warm atmosphere of the church, the lovely solo by 
Miss Helen Hatcher, the powerful sermon by Preacher Bob, and so on. 

Needless to say, this proved to be very popular. 

At least twice a month, I went to church. I sat with Miss Callie and Esau and listened to 
the Reverend Thurston Small preach for two hours and twelve minutes (I timed every 
sermon). The briefest was delivered by Pastor Phil Bish at the United Methodist Church 
of Karaway—seventeen minutes. That church also got the award for being the coldest. 
The furnace was broken, it was January, and that may have helped shorten the sermon. I 
sat with Margaret at the First Baptist Church in Clanton and listened to Reverend Millard 
Stark give his annual sermon on the sins of alcohol. With bad timing, I had a hangover 
that morning and Stark kept looking at me. 

I found the Harvest Tabernacle in the back room of an abandoned service station in 
Beech Hill, and I sat with six others as a wild-eyed doomsayer named Peter the Prophet 
yelled at us for almost an hour. My column that week was quite brief. 

The Clanton Church of Christ had no musical instruments. The ban was based on 
Scripture, it was later explained to me. There was a beautiful solo, which I wrote about at 
length. There was also no emotion whatsoever in the service. For a contrast, I went to the 
Mount Pisgah Chapel in Lowtown, where the pulpit was surrounded by drums, guitars, 


horns, and amplifiers. As a warmup for the sermon, a full-blown concert was given with 
the congregation singing and dancing. Miss Callie referred to Mount Pisgah as a “lower 
church.” 

On my list, number sixty-four was the Calico Ridge Independent Church, located deep in 
the hills in the northeastern part of the county. According to the Times archives, at this 
church in 1965 a Mr. Randy Bovee was bitten twice by a rattlesnake during a late Sunday 
night worship service. Mr. Bovee survived, and for a while the snakes were put away. 
The legend, however, flourished, and as my Church Notes column gained popularity, I 
was asked several times if I intended to visit Calico Ridge. 

“I plan to visit every church,” was my standard reply. 

“They don’t like visitors,” Baggy warned me. 

I had been greeted so warmly in each church—black or white, large or small, town or 
country—that I could not imagine Christian folks being rude to a guest. 

And they weren’t rude at Calico Ridge, but they weren’t too happy to see me either. I 
wanted to see the snakes, but from the safety of the back row. I went on a Sunday night, 
primarily because legend held that they did not “take up the serpents” during daylight 
hours. I searched the Bible in vain for this restriction. 

There was no sign of any serpents. There were a few fits and convulsions below the 
pulpit as the preacher exhorted us to “come forth and moan and groan in sin!” The choir 
chanted and hummed to the beat of an electric guitar and a drum, and the meeting took on 
the spookiness of an ancient tribal dance. I wanted to leave, especially since there were 
no snakes. 

Late in the service, I caught a glimpse of a face I’d seen before. It was a very different 
face—thin, pale, gaunt, topped with grayish hair. I couldn’t place it, but I knew it was 
familiar. The man was seated in the second row from the front, on the other side of the 
small sanctuary, and he seemed out of touch with the chaos of the worship service. At 
times he appeared to be praying, then he would sit while everyone else was standing. 
Those around him seemed to accept him and ignore him at the same time. 

He turned once and looked directly at me. It was Hank Hooten, the ex-lawyer who’d shot 
up the town in 1971! He’d been taken in a straitjacket to the state mental hospital, and a 
few years later there’d been a rumor that he had been released. No one had seen him, 
though. 

For two days after that, I tried to track down Hank Hooten. My calls to the state mental 
hospital went nowhere. Hank had a brother in Shady Grove, but he refused to talk. I 
snooped around Calico Ridge, but, typically, no one there would utter a word to a 
stranger like me. 


Chapter 33 

Many of those who worshiped diligently on Sunday mornings became less faithful on 
Sunday nights. During my tour of churches, I heard many preachers chide their followers 
to return in a few hours to properly complete the observance of the Sabbath. I never 
counted heads, but as a general rule about half of them did so. I tried a few Sunday night 
services, usually in an effort to catch some colorful ritual such as snake handling or 
disease healing or, on one occasion, a “church conclave” in which a wayward brother was 
to be put on trial and certainly convicted for fancying another brother’s wife. My 
presence rattled them that night and the wayward brother got a reprieve. 

For the most part, I limited my study of comparative religions to the daylight hours. 

Others had different Sunday-night rituals. Harry Rex helped a Mexican named Pepe lease 
a building and open a restaurant one block off the square. Pepe’s became moderately 
successful during the 1970s with decent food that was always on the spicy side. Pepe 
couldn’t resist the peppers, regardless of how they scalded the throats of his gringo 
customers. 

On Sundays all alcohol was banned in Ford County. It could not be sold at retail or in 
restaurants. Pepe had a back room with a long table and a door that would lock. He 
allowed Harry Rex and his guests to use the room and eat and drink all we wanted. His 
margaritas were especially tasty. We enjoyed many colorful meals with spicy dishes, all 
washed down with strong margaritas. There were usually a dozen of us, all male, all 
young, about half currently married. Harry Rex threatened our lives if we told anyone 
about Pepe’s back room. 

The Clanton city police raided us once, but Pepe suddenly couldn’t speak a word of 
English. The door to the back room was locked, and partially hidden too. Pepe turned off 
the lights, and for twenty minutes we waited in the dark, still drinking, and listened to the 
cops try to communicate with Pepe. I don’t know why we were worried. The city Judge 
was a lawyer named Harold Finkley, who was at the end of the table slogging down his 
fourth or fifth margarita. 

Those Sunday nights at Pepe’s were often long and rowdy, and afterward we were in no 
condition to drive. I would walk to my office and sleep on the sofa. I was there snoring 
off the tequila when the phone rang after midnight. It was a reporter I knew from the big 
daily in Memphis. 

“Are you covering the parole hearing tomorrow?” he asked. Tomorrow? In my toxic fog I 
had no idea what day it was. 


“Tomorrow?” I mumbled. 

“Monday, September the eighteenth,” he said slowly. 

I was reasonably certain the year was 1978. 

“What parole hearing?” I asked, trying desperately to wake myself up and put two 
thoughts together. 

“Danny Padgitt’s. You don’t know about it?” 

“Hell no!” 

“It’s scheduled for ten A.M. at Parchman.” 

“You gotta be kidding!” 

“Nope. I just found out. Evidently, they don’t advertise these.” 

I sat in the darkness for a long time, cursing once again the backwardness of a state that 
conducted such important matters in such ridiculous ways. How could parole even be 
considered for Danny Padgitt? Eight years had passed since the murder and his 
conviction. He had received two life sentences of at least ten years each. We assumed 
that meant a minimum of twenty years. 

I drove home around 3 A.M… slept fitfully for two hours, then woke up Harry Rex, who 
was in no condition to be dealt with. I picked up sausage biscuits and strong coffee and 
we met at his office around seven. We were both ill-tempered, and as we plowed through 
his law books there were sharp words and foul language, not aimed at each other, but at 
the blurry and toothless parole system passed by the legislature thirty years earlier. 
Guidelines were only vaguely defined, leaving ample wiggle room for the politicians and 
their appointees to do as they wished. 

Since most law-abiding citizens had no contact with the parole system, it was not a 
priority with the state legislature. And since most of the state’s prisoners were either poor 
or black, and unable to use the system to their advantage, it was easy to hit them with 
harsh sentences and keep them locked up. But for an inmate with a few connections and 
some cash, the parole system was a marvelous labyrinth of contradictory laws that 
allowed the Parole Board to pass out favors. 

Somewhere between the judicial system, the penal system, and the parole system, Danny 
Padgitt’s two “consecutive” life terms had been changed to two “concurrent” sentences. 
They ran side by side, Harry Rex tried to explain. 

“What good is that?” I asked. 


“It’s used in cases where a defendant has multiple charges. Consecutive might give him 
eighty years in jail, but a fair sentence is ten. So they run ‘em side by side.” 

I shook my head in disapproval again, and this irritated him. 

I finally got Sheriff Tryce McNatt to answer the phone. He sounded as hung over as we 
were, though he was a strict teetotaler. McNatt knew nothing about the parole hearing. I 
asked him if he planned to attend, but his day was already filled with important meetings. 

I would have called Judge Loopus, but he’d been dead for six years. Ernie Gaddis had 
retired and was fishing in the Smoky Mountains. His successor, Rufus Buckley, lived in 
Tyler County and his phone number was unlisted. 

At eight o’clock, I jumped in my car with a biscuit and a cup of cold coffee. 

*** 

An hour west of Ford County the land flattened dramatically and the Delta began. It was 
a region rich in farming and poor in living conditions, but I was in no mood to take in the 
sights and offer social commentary. I was too nervous about crashing a clandestine parole 
hearing. 

I was also nervous about setting foot inside Parchman, a legendary hellhole. 

After two hours, I saw fences next to fields, then razor wire. Soon there was a sign, and I 
turned into the main gate. I informed a guard in the booth that I was a reporter, there for a 
parole hearing. “Straight ahead, left at the second building,” he said helpfully as he wrote 
down my name. 

There was a cluster of buildings close to the highway, and a row of white-frame houses 
that would fit on any Maple Street in Mississippi. I chose the Admin A building and 
sprinted inside, looking for the first secretary. I found her, and she sent me to the next 
building, second floor. It was just about ten. 

There were people at the end of the hallway, loitering outside a room. One was a prison 
guard, one was a state trooper, one wore a wrinkled suit. 

“I’m here for a parole hearing,” I announced. 


“In there,” the guard said, pointing. Without knocking, I yanked open the door, as any 
intrepid reporter would, and stepped inside. Things had just been called to order, and my 
presence there was certainly not anticipated. 

There were five members of the Parole Board, and they were seated behind a slightly 
elevated table with their name plates in front of them. Along one wall another table held 
the Padgitt crowd—Danny, his father, his mother, an uncle, and Lucien Wilbanks. 
Opposite them, behind another table, were various clerks and functionaries of the Board 
and the prison. 

Everyone stared at me as I stormed in. My eyes locked onto Danny Padgitt’s, and for a 
second both of us managed to convey the contempt we felt for the other. 

“Can I help you?” a large, badly dressed ole boy growled from the center of the Board. 
His name was Barrett Ray Jeter, the chairman. Like the other four, he’d been appointed 
by the Governor as a reward for vote-gathering. 

“I’m here for the Padgitt hearing,” I said. 

“He’s a reporter!” Lucien practically yelled as he was standing. For a second I thought I 
might get arrested on the spot and be carried deeper into the prison for a life sentence. 

“For who?” Jeter demanded. 

“The Ford County Times,” I said. 

“Your name?” 

“Willie Traynor.” I was glaring at Lucien and he was scowling at me. 

“This is a closed hearing, Mr. Traynor,” Jeter said. The statute wasn’t clear as to whether 
it was open or closed, so it had traditionally been kept quiet. 

“Who has the right to attend?” I asked. 

“The Parole Board, the parolee, his family, his witnesses, his lawyer, and any witnesses 
for the other side.” The “other side” meant the victim’s family, which in this setting 
sounded like the bad guys. 

“What about the Sheriff from our county?” I asked. 

“He’s invited too,” Jeter said. 

“Our Sheriff wasn’t notified. I talked to him three hours ago. In fact, nobody in Ford 
County knew of this hearing until after twelve last night.” This caused considerable headscratching up and down the Parole Board. The Padgitts huddled with Lucien. 


By process of elimination, I quickly deduced that I had to become a witness if I wanted to 
watch the show. I said, as loudly and clearly as possible, “Well, since there’s no one else 
here from Ford County in opposition, I’m a witness.” 

“You can’t be a reporter and a witness,” Jeter said. 

“Where is that written in the Mississippi Code?” I asked, waving my copies from Harry 
Rex’s law books. 

Jeter nodded at a young man in a dark suit. “I’m the attorney for the Parole Board,” he 
said politely. “You can testify in this hearing, Mr. Traynor, but you cannot report it.” 

I planned to fully report every detail of the hearing, then hide behind the First 
Amendment. “So be it,” I said. “You guys make the rules.” In less than one minute the 
lines had been drawn; I was on one side, everybody else was on the other. 

“Let’s proceed,” Jeter said, and I took a seat with a handful of other spectators. 

The attorney for the Parole Board passed out a report. He recited the basics of the Padgitt 
sentence, and was careful not to use the words “consecutive” or “concurrent.” Based on 
the inmate’s “exemplary” record during his incarceration, he had qualified for “good 
time,” a vague concept created by the parole system and not by the state legislature. 
Subtracting the time the inmate spent in the county jail awaiting trial, he was now eligible 
for parole. 

Danny’s caseworker plowed through a lengthy narrative of her relationship with the 
inmate. She concluded with the gratuitous opinion that he was “fully remorseful,” “fully 
rehabilitated,” “no threat whatsoever to society,” even ready to become a “most 
productive citizen.” 

How much did all this cost? I couldn’t help but ponder that question. How much? And 
how long had it taken for the Padgitts to find the right pockets? 

Lucien went next. With no one—Gaddis, Sheriff McNatt—not even poor Hank Hooten— 
to contradict or possibly throttle him, he launched into a fictional recounting of the facts 
of the crimes, and in particular the testimony of an “airtight” alibi witness, Lydia Vince. 
His reconstructed version of the trial had the jury wavering on a verdict of not guilty. I 
was tempted to throw something at him and start screaming. Maybe that would at least 
keep him somewhat honest. 

I wanted to shout, “How can he be remorseful if he’s so innocent?” 

Lucien carped on about the trial and how unfair it had been. He nobly took the blame for 
not pushing hard for a change of venue, to another part of the state where folks were 


unbiased and more enlightened. When he finally shut up two of the board members 
appeared to be asleep. 

Mrs. Padgitt testified next and talked about the letters she and her son had exchanged 
these past eight, very long years. Through his letters, she had seen him mature, seen his 
faith strengthen, seen him long for his freedom so he could serve his fellow man. 

Serve them a stronger blend of pot? Or perhaps a cleaner corn whiskey? 

Since tears were expected she gave us some tears. It was part of the show and appeared to 
have little sway over the Board. In fact, as I watched their faces I got the impression that 
their decision had been made a long time ago. 

Danny went last and did a good job of walking the fine line between denying his crimes 
and showing remorse for them. “I have learned from my mistakes,” he said, as if rape and 
murder were simple indiscretions where no one really got hurt. “I have grown from 
them.” 

In prison he had been a veritable whirlwind of positive energy—volunteering in the 
library, singing in the choral group, helping with the Parchman rodeo, organizing teams 
to go into schools and scare kids away from crime. 

Two Board members were listening. One was still asleep. The other two sat in trancelike 
meditation, apparently brain dead. 

Danny shed no tears, but closed with an impassioned plea for his release. 

“How many witnesses in opposition?” Jeter announced. I stood, looked around me, saw 
no one else from Ford County, then said, “I guess it’s just me.” 

“Proceed, Mr. Traynor.” 

I had no idea what to say, nor did I know what was permissible or objectionable in such a 
forum. But based on what I had just sat through, I figured I could say anything I damned 
well pleased. Fat Jeter would no doubt call me down if I ventured into forbidden territory. 

I looked up at the Board members, tried my best to ignore the daggers from the Padgitts, 
and jumped into an extremely graphic description of the rape and the murder. I unloaded 
everything I could possibly remember, and I put special emphasis on the fact that the two 
children witnessed some or all of the attack. 

I kept waiting for Lucien to object, but there was nothing but silence in their camp. The 
formerly comatose Board members were suddenly alive, all watching me closely, 
absorbing the gruesome details of the murder. I described the wounds. I painted the 
heartbreaking scene of Rhoda dying in the arms of Mr. Deece, and saying, “It was Danny 
Padgitt. It was Danny Padgitt.” 


I called Lucien a liar and mocked his memory of the trial. It took the jury less than an 
hour to find the defendant guilty, I explained. 

And with a recollection that surprised even me, I recounted Danny’s pathetic 
performance on the witness stand: his lying to cover up his lies; his total lack of 
truthfulness. “He should’ve been indicted for perjury,” I told the Board. 

“And when he had finished testifying, instead of returning to his seat, he walked to the 
jury box, shook his finger in the faces of the jurors, and said, ‘You convict me, and I’ll 
get every damned one of you.’ “ 

A Board member named Mr. Horace Adler jerked upright in his seat and blurted toward 
the Padgitts, “Is that true?” 

“It’s in the record,” I said quickly before Lucien had the chance to lie again. He was 
slowly getting to his feet. 

“Is that true, Mr. Wilbanks?” Adler insisted. 

“He threatened the jury?” asked another board member. 

“I have the transcript,” I said. “I’ll be happy to send it to you.” 

“Is that true?” Adler asked for the third time. 

“There were three hundred people in the courtroom,” I said, staring at Lucien and saying 
with my eyes, Don’t do it. Don’t lie about it. 

“Shut up, Mr. Traynor,” a Board member said. 

“It’s in the record,” I said again. 

“That’s enough!” Jeter shouted. 

Lucien was standing and trying to think of a response. Everyone was waiting. Finally, “I 
don’t remember everything that was said,” he began, and I snorted as loudly as possible. 
“Perhaps my client did say something to that effect, but it was an emotional moment, and 
in the heat of the battle, something like that might have been said. But taken in context— 
” 

“Context my ass!” I yelled at Lucien and took a step toward him as if I might throw a 
punch. A guard stepped toward me and I stopped. “It’s in black-and-white in the trial 
transcript!” I said angrily. Then I turned to the Board and said, “How can you folks sit 
there and let them lie like this? Don’t you want to hear the truth?” 


“Anything else, Mr. Traynor?” Jeter asked. 

“Yes! I hope this Board will not make a mockery out of our system and let this man go 
free after eight years. He’s lucky to be sitting here instead of on death row, where he 
belongs. And I hope that the next time you have a hearing on his parole, if there is a next 
time, you will invite some of the good folks from Ford County. Perhaps the Sheriff, 
perhaps the prosecutor. And could you notify members of the victim’s family? They have 
the right to be here so you can see their faces when you turn this murderer loose.” 

I sat down and fumed. I glared at Lucien Wilbanks and decided that I would work 
diligently to hate him for the rest of either his life or mine, whichever ended first. Jeter 
announced a brief recess, and I assumed they needed time to regroup in a back room and 
count their money. Perhaps Mr. Padgitt could be summoned to provide some extra cash 
for a Board member or two. To irritate the Board attorney, I scribbled pages of notes for 
the report he’d prohibited me from writing. 

We waited thirty minutes before they filed back in, everyone looking guilty of something. 
Jeter called for a vote. Two voted in favor of parole, two against, one abstained. “Parole 
is denied at this time,” Jeter announced, and Mrs. Padgitt burst into tears. She hugged 
Danny before they took him away. 

Lucien and the Padgitts walked by, very close to me as they left the room. I ignored them 
and just stared at the floor, exhausted, hungover, shocked at the denial. 

“Next we have Charles D. Bowie,” Jeter announced, and there was movement around the 
tables as the next hopeful was brought in. I caught something about a sex offender, but I 
was too drained to care. I eventually left the room and walked down the hallway, halfexpecting to be confronted by the Padgitts, and that was fine too because I preferred to 
get it over with. 

But they had scattered; there was no sign of them as I left the building and drove through 
the main gate and back to Clanton. 

Chapter 34 

The parole hearing was front page news in The Ford County Times. I loaded the report 
with every detail I could remember, and on page five let loose with a blistering editorial 
about the process. I sent a copy to each member of the Parole Board and to its attorney, 
and, because I was so worked up, every member of the state legislature, the Attorney 
General, the Lieutenant Governor, and the Governor received a complimentary copy. 
Most ignored it, but the attorney for the Parole Board did not. 


He wrote me a lengthy letter in which he said he was deeply concerned about my “willful 
violation of Parole Board procedures.” He was pondering a session with the Attorney 
General in which they would “evaluate the gravity of my actions” and possibly pursue 
action that would lead to “far-reaching consequences.” 

My lawyer, Harry Rex, had assured me the Parole Board’s policy of secret meetings was 
patently unconstitutional, in clear violation of the First Amendment, and he would 
happily defend me in federal court. For a reduced hourly rate, of course. 

I swapped heated letters with the Board’s lawyer for a month before he seemed to lose 
interest in pursuing me. 

Rafe, Harry Rex’s chief ambulance chaser, had a sidekick named Buster, a large thickchested cowboy with a gun in every pocket. I hired Buster for $100 a week to pretend he 
was my own personal legbreaker. For a few hours a day he would hang around the front 
of the office, or sit in my driveway or on one of my porches, any place where he might be 
seen so folks would know that Willie Traynor was important enough to have a bodyguard. 
If the Padgitts got close enough to take a shot, they would at least get something in return. 

*** 

After years of steadily gaining weight and ignoring the warnings of her doctors, Miss 
Callie finally relented. After a particularly bad visit to her clinic, she announced to Esau 
that she was going on a diet—1,500 calories a day, except, mercifully, Thursday. A 
month passed and I couldn’t discern any loss of weight. But the day after the Times story 
on the parole hearing, she suddenly looked as though she’d lost fifty pounds. 

Instead of frying a chicken, she baked one. Instead of whipping mashed potatoes with 
butter and thick cream and covering them with gravy, she boiled them. It was still 
delicious, but my system had become accustomed to its weekly dose of heavy grease. 

After the prayer, I handed her two letters from Sam. As always, she read them 
immediately while I jumped into the lunch. And as always, she smiled and laughed and 
then finally wiped a tear. “He’s doing fine,” she said, and he was. 

With typical Ruffin tenacity, Sam had completed his first college degree, in economics, 
and was saving his money for law school. He was terribly homesick, and weary of the 
weather. To boil it all down, he missed his momma. And her cooking. 

President Carter had pardoned the draft dodgers, and Sam was wrestling with the decision 
to stay in Canada, or come home. Many of his expatriate friends up there were vowing to 


stay and pursue Canadian citizenship, and he was heavily influenced by them. There was 
also a woman involved, though he had not told his parents. 

Sometimes we began with the news, but often it was the obituaries or even the classifieds. 
Since she read every word, Miss Callie knew who was selling a new litter of beagles and 
who wanted to buy a good used riding mower. And since she read every word every 
week, she knew how long a certain small farm or a mobile home had been on the market. 
She knew prices and values. A car would pass on the street during lunch. She would ask, 
“Now, what model is that?” 

“A 71 Plymouth Duster,” I would answer. 

She would hesitate for a second, then say, “If it’s real clean, it’s in the twenty-fivehundred-dollar range.” 

Stan Atcavage once needed to sell a twenty-four-foot fishing boat he’d repossessed. I 
called Miss Callie. She said, “Yes, a gentleman from Karaway was looking for one three 
weeks ago.” I checked an old section of the classifieds and found the ad. Stan sold him 
the boat the next day. 

She loved the legal notices, one of the most lucrative sections of the paper. Deeds, 
foreclosures, divorce filings, probate matters, bankruptcy announcements, annexation 
hearings, dozens of legal notices were required by law to be published in the county 
paper. We got them all, and we charged a healthy rate. 

“I see where Mr. Everett Wainwright’s estate is being probated,” she said. 

“I vaguely remember his obituary,” I said with a mouthful. “When did he die?” 

“Five, maybe six months ago. Wasn’t much of an obituary.” 

“I have to work with whatever the family gives me. Did you know him?” 

“He owned a grocery store near the tracks for many years.” I could tell by the inflection 
in her voice that she did not care for Mr. Everett Wainwright. 

“Good guy or bad buy?” 

“He had two sets of prices, one for the whites, a higher one for Negroes. His goods were 
never marked in any way, and he was the only cashier. A white customer would call out, 
‘Say, Mr. Wainwright, how much is this can of condensed milk?’ and he’d holler back, 
‘Thirty-eight cents.’ A minute later I would say, ‘Pardon me, Mr. Wainwright, but how 
much is this can of condensed milk?’ And he’d snap, ‘Fifty-four cents.’ He was very 
open about it. He didn’t care.” 


For almost nine years I’d heard stories of the old days. At times I thought I’d heard them 
all, but Miss Callie’s collection was endless. 

“Why did you shop there?” 

“It was the only store where we could shop. Mr. Monty Griffin ran a nicer store behind 
the old moviehouse, but we couldn’t shop there until twenty years ago.” 

“Who stopped you?” 

“Mr. Monty Griffin. He didn’t care if you had money, he didn’t want any Negroes in his 
store.” 

“And Mr. Wainwright didn’t care?” 

“He cared all right. He didn’t want us, but he would take our money.” 

She told the story of a Negro boy who loitered around the store until Mr. Wainwright 
struck him with a broom and sent him away. For revenge, the boy broke into the store 
once or twice a year for a long time and was never caught. He stole cigarettes and candy, 
and he also splintered all the broom handles. 

“Is it true he left all his money to the Methodist church?” she asked. 

“That’s the rumor.” 

“How much?” 

“Around a hundred thousand dollars.” 

“Folks say he was trying to buy his way into heaven,” she said. I had long since ceased to 
be amazed at the gossip Miss Callie heard from the other side of the tracks. Many of her 
friends worked as housekeepers over there. The maids knew everything. 

She had once again nudged the conversation to the topic of the afterlife. Miss Callie was 
deeply concerned about my soul. She was worried that I had not properly become a 
Christian; that I had not been “born again” or “saved.” My infant baptism, which I could 
not remember, was thoroughly insufficient in her view. Once a person reaches a certain 
age, the “age of accountability,” then, in order to be “saved” from everlasting damnation 
in hell, that person must walk down the aisle of a church (the right church was the subject 
of eternal debate) and make a public profession of faith in Jesus Christ. 

Miss Callie carried a heavy burden because I had not done this. 

And, after having visited seventy-seven different churches, I had to admit that the vast 
majority of the people in Ford County shared her beliefs. There were some variations. A 


powerful sect was the Church of Christ. They clung to the odd notion that they, and only 
they, were destined for heaven. Every other church was preaching “sectarian doctrine.” 
They also believed, as did many congregations, that once a person obtained salvation 
then it could be lost by bad behavior. The Baptists, the most popular denomination, held 
firm in “once saved always saved.” 

This was apparently very comforting for several backslidden Baptists I knew in town.
However, there was hope for me. Miss Callie was thrilled that I was attending church and
absorbing the gospel. She was convinced, and she prayed about me continually, that one


day soon the Lord would reach down and touch my heart. I would decide to follow him,
and she and I would spend eternity together.
Miss Callie was truly living for the day when she “went Home to glory.”
“Reverend Small will preside over the Lord’s supper this Sunday,” she said. It was her


weekly invitation to sit with her in church. Reverend Small and his long sermons were
more than I could bear.
“Thank you, but I’m doing research again this Sunday,” I said.
“God bless you. Where?”
“The Maranatha Primitive Baptist Church.”
“Never heard of it.”
“It’s in the phone book.”
“Where is it?”
“Somewhere down in Dumas, I think.”
“Black or white?”
“I’m not sure.”


***


Number seventy-eight on my list, the Maranatha Primitive Baptist Church, was a little 
jewel at the foot of a hill, next to a creek, under a cluster of pin oaks that were at least 


two hundred years old. It was a small white-frame building, narrow and long, with a 
high-pitched tin roof and a red steeple that was so tall it got lost in the oaks. The front 
doors were open wide, beckoning any and all to come worship. A cornerstone gave the 
date as 1813. 

I eased into the back pew, my usual place, and sat next to a well-dressed gentleman 
who’d been around for as long as the church. I counted fifty-six other worshipers that 
morning. The windows were wide open, and outside a gentle breeze rushed through the 
trees and soothed the rough edges of a hectic morning. For a century and a half people 
had gathered there, sat on the same pews, looked through the same windows at the same 
trees, and worshiped the same God. The choir—all eight—sang a gentle hymn and I 
drifted back to another century. 

The pastor was a jovial man named J. B. Cooper. I’d met him twice over the years while 
scrambling around trying to put together obituaries. One side benefit to my tour of county 
churches was the introduction to all the ministers. This really helped spice up my obits. 

Pastor Cooper gazed upon his flock and realized I was the only visitor. He called my 
name, welcomed me, and made some harmless crack about getting favorable coverage in 
the Times. After four years of touring, and seventy-seven rather generous and colorful 
Church Notes, it was impossible for me to sneak into a service without getting noticed. 

I never knew what to expect in these rural churches. More often than not the sermons 
were loud and long, and many times I wondered how such good people could drag 
themselves in week after week for a tongue-lashing. Some preachers were almost sadistic 
in their condemnation of whatever their followers might have done that week. Everything 
was a sin in rural Mississippi, and not just the basics as set forth in the Ten 
Commandments. I heard scathing rebukes of television, movies, cardplaying, popular 
magazines, sports events, cheerleader uniforms, desegregation, mixed-race churches, 
Disney—because it came on Sunday nights—dancing, social drinking, postmarital sex, 
everything. 

But Pastor Cooper was at peace. His sermon—twenty-eight minutes—was about 
tolerance and love. Love was Christ’s principal message. The one thing Christ wanted us 
to do was to love one another. For the altar call we sang three verses of “Just As I Am,” 
but no one moved. These folks had been down the aisle many times. 

As always, I hung around afterward for a few minutes to speak with Pastor Cooper. I told 
him how much I enjoyed the service, something I did whether I meant it or not, and I 
collected the names of the choir members for my column. Church folk were naturally 
warm and friendly, but at this stage of my tour they wanted to chat forever and pass along 
little gems that might end up in print. “My grandfather put the roof on this building in 
1902.” “The tornado of ‘38 skipped right over us during the summer revival.” 

As I was leaving the building, I saw a man in a wheelchair being pushed down the 
handicap ramp. It was a face I’d seen before, and I walked over to say hello. Lenny 


Fargarson, the crippled boy, juror number seven or eight, had evidently taken a turn for 
the worse. During the trial in 1970 he had been able to walk, though it was not a pretty 
thing to behold. Now he was in a chair. His father introduced himself. His mother was in 
a cluster of ladies finishing up one last round of goodbyes. 

“Got a minute?” Fargarson asked. In Mississippi, that question really meant “We need to 
talk and it might take a while.” I sat on a bench under one of the oaks. His father rolled 
him over, then left us to talk. 

“I see your paper every week,” he said. “You think Padgitt will get out?”
“Sure. It’s just a question of when. He can apply for parole once a year, every year.”
“Will he come back here, to Ford County?”
I shrugged because I had no idea. “Probably. The Padgitts slick close to their land.”
He considered this for some time. He was gaunt and hunched over like an old man. If my


memory was correct, he was about twenty-five at the time of the trial. We were roughly 
about the same age, though he looked twice as old. I had heard the story of his 
affliction—some injury in a sawmill. 

“Does that frighten you?” I asked.
He smiled and said, “Nothing frightens me, Mr. Traynor. The Lord is my shepherd.”
“Yes he is,” I said, still warm from the sermon. Because of his physical condition and his


wheelchair, Lenny was a difficult person to read. He had endured so much. His faith was
strong, but I thought for a second that I caught a hint of apprehension.
Mrs. Fargarson was walking toward us.
“Will you be there when he’s released?” Lenny asked.
“I’d like to be, but I’m not sure how it’s done.”
“Will you call me when you know he’s out?”


“Of course.” 
Mrs. Fargarson had a pot roast in the oven for Sunday lunch, and she wouldn’t take no 
for an answer. I was suddenly hungry, and there was, as usual, nothing remotely tasty in 
the Hocutt House. Sunday lunch was typically a cold sandwich and a glass of wine on a 
side porch, followed by a long siesta. 


Lenny lived with his parents on a gravel road two miles from the church. His father was a 
rural mail carrier, his mother a schoolteacher. An older sister was in Tupelo. Over roast 
and potatoes and tea almost as sweet as Miss Callie’s, we relived the Kassellaw trial and 
Padgitt’s first parole hearing. Lenny may have been unconcerned about Danny’s possible 
release, but his parents were deeply worried. 

Chapter 35 

Big news hit Clanton in the spring of 1978, Bargain City was coming! Along with 
McDonald’s and the fast-food joints that followed it around the country, Bargain City 
was a national chain rapidly marching through the small towns of the South. Most of the 
town rejoiced. Some of us, though, felt it was the beginning of the end. 

The company was taking over the world with its “big box” discount warehouses that 
offered everything at very low prices. The stores were spacious and clean and included 
cafes, pharmacies, banks, even optometrists and travel agents. A small town without a 
Bargain City store was irrelevant and insignificant. 

They optioned fifty acres on Market Street, about a mile from the Clanton square. Some 
of the neighbors protested, and the city council held a public hearing on whether to allow 
the store to be built. Bargain City had met opposition before, and it had a well-oiled and 
highly effective strategy. 

The council room was packed with people holding red-and-white Bargain City signs— 
BARGAIN CITY—A GOOD NEIGHBOR and WE WANT JOBS. Engineers, architects, 
lawyers, and contractors were there, with their secretaries and wives and children. Their 
mouthpiece painted a rosy picture of economic growth, sales tax revenues, 150 jobs for 
the locals, and the best products at the lowest prices. 

Mrs. Dorothy Hockett spoke in opposition. Her property was adjacent to the site and she 
did not want the invasion of noise and lights. The city council seemed sympathetic, but 
the vote had long since been decided. When no one else would speak against Bargain 
City, I stood and walked to the podium. 

I was driven by a belief that to preserve the downtown area of Clanton we had to protect 
the stores and shops, cafes and offices around the square. Once we began sprawling, there 
would be no end to it. The town would spread in a dozen directions, each one siphoning 
off its own little slice of old Clanton. 

Most of the jobs they were promising would be at minimum wage. The increase in sales 
tax revenues to the city would be at the expense of the merchants Bargain City would 
quickly drive out of business. The people of Ford County were not going to wake up one 


day and suddenly start buying more bicycles and refrigerators simply because Bargain 
City had such dazzling displays. 

I mentioned the town of Titus, about an hour south of Clanton. Two years earlier, Bargain 
City opened there. Since then, fourteen retail stores and one cafe had closed. Main Street 
was almost deserted. 

I mentioned the town of Marshall, over in the Delta. In the three years since Bargain City 
opened, the mom-and-pop merchants of Marshall had closed two pharmacies, two small 
department stores, the feed store, the hardware store, a ladies’ boutique, a gift shop, a 
small bookstore, and two cafes. I’d had lunch in the remaining cafe and the waitress, 
who’d worked there for thirty years, told me their business was less than half of what it 
used to be. The square in Marshall was similar to Clan-ton’s, except that most of the 
parking spaces were empty. There were very few folks walking the sidewalks. 

I mentioned the town of Tackerville, with the same population as Clanton. One year after 
Bargain City opened there, the town was forced to spend $1.2 million on road 
improvements to handle the traffic around the development. 

I handed the Mayor and councilmen copies of a study by an economics professor at the 
University of Georgia. He had tracked Bargain City across the South for the previous six 
years and evaluated the financial and social impact the company had on towns of less 
than ten thousand. Sales tax revenues remained roughly the same; the sales were simply 
shifted from the old merchants to Bargain City. Employment was roughly the same; the 
clerks in the old stores downtown were replaced by the new ones at Bargain City. The 
company made no substantial investment in the community, other than its land and 
building. In fact, it would not even allow its money to sit in local banks. At midnight, 
every night, the day’s receipts were wired to the home office in Gainesville, Florida. 

The study concluded that expansion was obviously wise for the shareholders of Bargain 
City, but it was economically devastating for most small towns. And the real damage was 
cultural. With boarded-up stores and empty sidewalks, the rich town life of main streets 
and courthouse squares was quickly dying. 

A petition in support of Bargain City had 480 names. Our petition in opposition had 12. 
The council voted unanimously, 5-0, to approve it. 

I wrote a harsh editorial and for a month read nasty letters addressed to me. For the first 
time, I was called a “tree-hugger.” 

Within a month, the bulldozers had completely razed fifty acres. The curbs and gutters 
were in, and a grand opening was announced for December 1, just in time for Christmas. 
With money committed, Bargain City wasted no time in building its warehouse. The 
company had a reputation for shrewd and decisive management. 


The store and its parking lot covered about twenty acres. The outparcels were quickly 
sold to other chains, and before long the city had approved a sixteen-pump self-serve gas 
station, a convenience store, three fast-food restaurants, a discount shoe store, a discount 
furniture store, and a large grocery store. 

I could not deny advertising to Bargain City. I didn’t need their money, but since the 
Times was the only countywide paper, they had to advertise in it. (In response to a zoning 
flap I stirred up in 1977, a small right-wing rag called the Clanton Chronicle was up and 
running but struggling mightily.) 

In mid-November, I met with a representative of the company and we laid out a series of 
rather expensive ads for the opening. I charged them as much as possible; they never 
complained. 

On December 1, the Mayor, Senator Morton, and other dignitaries cut the ribbon. A 
rowdy mob burst through the doors and began shopping as if the hungry had found food. 
Traffic backed up on the highways leading into town. 

I refused to give it front page coverage. I buried a rather small story on page seven, and 
this angered the Mayor and Senator Morton and the other dignitaries. They expected their 
ribbon cutting to be front and center. 

The Christmas season was brutal for the downtown merchants. Three days after 
Christmas, the first casualty was reported when the old Western Auto store announced it 
was closing. It had occupied the same building for forty years, selling bicycles and 
appliances and televisions. Mr. Hollis Barr, the owner, told me that a certain Zenith color 
TV cost him $438, and he, after several price cuts, was trying to sell it for $510. The 
identical model was for sale at Bargain City for $399. 

The closing of Western Auto was, of course, front page news. 

It was followed in January by the closing of Swain’s pharmacy next to the Tea Shoppe, 
and then Maggie’s Gifts, next door to Mr. Mitlo’s haberdashery. I treated each closing as 
if it were a death, and my stories had the air of obituaries. 

I spent one afternoon with the Stukes twins in their hardware store. It was a wonderful 
old building, with dusty wooden floors, saggy shelves that held a million items, a woodburning stove in the back where serious things got debated when business was slow. You 
couldn’t find anything in the store, and you weren’t supposed to. The routine was to ask 
one of the twins about “the little flat gizmo that screws into the washer at the tip of that 
rod thing that fits into the gadget that makes the toilet flush.” One of the Stukes would 
disappear into the slightly organized piles of debris and emerge in a few minutes with 
whatever it took to make the toilet flush. Such a question could not be asked at Bargain 
City. 


We sat by the stove on a cold winter day and listened to the rantings of one Cecil Clyde 
Poole, a retired Army major, who, if put in charge of national policy, would nuke 
everyone but the Canadians. He would also nuke Bargain City, and in some of the 
roughest, most colorful language I’d ever heard he ripped and blasted the company with 
great gusto. We had plenty of time to talk because there were almost no customers. One 
of the Stukes told me their business was down 70 percent. 

The following month they closed the doors to the store their father had opened in 1922. 
On the front page, I ran a photo of the founder sitting behind a counter in 1938. I also 
fired off another editorial, sort of a wise-ass “I-told-you-so” reminder to whoever was out 
there still reading my little tirades. 

“You’re preachin’ too much,” Harry Rex warned me over and over. “And nobody’s 
listenin’.” 

*** 

The front office of the Times was seldom attended. There were some tables with copies 
of the current edition strewn about. There was a counter that Margaret sometimes used to 
lay out ads. The bell on the front door rang all day long as people came and went. About 
once a week a stranger would venture upstairs where my office door was usually open. 
More often than not it was some grieving relative there to discuss an upcoming obituary. 

I looked up one afternoon in March 1979 and there was a gentleman in a nice suit 
standing at my office door. Unlike Harry Rex, whose entrance began on the street and 
was heard by everyone in the building, this guy had climbed the stairs without making a 
sound. 

His name was Gary McGrew, a consultant from Nashville, whose area of expertise was 
small-town newspapers. As I fixed a pot of coffee, he explained that a rather wellfinanced client of his was planning to buy several newspapers in Mississippi during 1979. 
Because I had seven thousand subscribers, no debt, an offset press, and because we now 
ran the printing for six smaller weeklies, plus our own shoppers’ guides, his client was 
very interested in buying The FordCounty Times. 

“How interested?” I asked. 

“Extremely. If we could look at the books, we could value your company.” 

He left and I made a few phone calls to verify his credibility. He checked out fine, and I 
collected my current financials. Three days later we met again, this time at night. I did 


not want Wiley or Baggy or anyone else hanging around. News that the Times was 
changing hands would be such hot gossip that they’d open the coffee shops at 3 A.M. 
instead of 5. 

McGrew crunched the numbers like a seasoned analyst. I waited, oddly nervous, as if the 
verdict might drastically change my life. 

“You’re clearing a hundred grand after taxes, plus you’re taking a salary of fifty grand. 
Depreciation is another twenty, no interest because you have no debt. That’s one-seventy 
in cash flow, times the standard multiple of six, comes to one million twenty thousand.” 

“And the building?” I asked. 

He glanced around as if the ceiling might collapse any moment. “These places typically 
don’t sell for much.” 

“A hundred thousand,” I said. 

“Okay. And a hundred thousand for the offset press and other equipment. The total value 
is somewhere in the neighborhood of one-point-two million.” 

“Is that an offer?” I asked, even more anxious. 

“It might be. I’ll have to discuss it with my client.” 

I had no intention of selling the Times. I had stumbled into the business, gotten a few 
lucky breaks, worked hard writing stories and obituaries and selling pages of ads, and 
now, nine years later, my little company was worth over a million dollars. 

I was young, still single though I was tired of being lonely and living alone in a mansion 
with three leftover Hocutt cats that refused to die. I had accepted the reality that I would 
not find a bride in Ford County. All the good ones were snatched up by their twentieth 
birthday, and I was too old to compete at that level. I dated all the young divorcees, most 
of whom were quick to hop in the sack and wake up in my fine home, and dream about 
spending all the money I was rumored to be making. The only one I really liked, and 
dated off and on for a year, was saddled with three small children. 

But it’s funny what a million bucks will do to you. Once it was in play, it was never far 
from my thoughts. The job became more tedious. I grew to resent the ridiculous 
obituaries and the endless pressure of the deadlines. I told myself at least once a day that I 
no longer had to hustle the street selling ads. I could quit the editorials. No more nasty 
letters to the editor. 

A week later, I told Gary McGrew that the Times was not for sale. He said his client had 
decided to buy three papers by the end of the year, so I had time to think about it. 


Remarkably, word of our discussions never leaked. 

Chapter 36 

On a Thursday afternoon in early May, I received a phone call from the attorney for the
Parole Board. The next Padgitt hearing would take place the following Monday.
“Convenient timing,” I said.
“Why’s that?” he asked.
“We publish every Wednesday, so I don’t have time to run a story before the hearing.”
“We don’t monitor your paper, Mr. Traynor,” he said.


“I don’t believe that,” I snapped.
“What you believe is irrelevant. The Board has decided that you will not be permitted to
attend the hearing. You violated our rules last time by reporting on what happened.”


“I’m banned?”
“That’s correct.”
“I’ll be there anyway.”
I hung up and called Sheriff McNatt. He, too, had been notified of the hearing, but wasn’t


sure if he could attend. He was hot on the trail of a missing child (from Wisconsin), and it


was obvious he had little interest in getting mixed up with the Padgitts.
Our District Attorney, Rufus Buckley, had an armed robbery trial scheduled for Monday
in Van Buren County. He promised to send a letter opposing the parole, but the letter
never made it. Circuit Judge Omar Noose was presiding over the same trial, so he was off
the hook. I began to think that no one would be there to speak in opposition to Padgitt’s
release.


For fun I asked Baggy to go. He gasped, then quickly let loose with an impressive list of


excuses.
I walked over to Harry Rex’s with the news. He had an ugly divorce trial starting
Monday in Tupelo; otherwise he might have gone with me to Parchman. “The boy’s
gonna be released, Willie,” he said.



“We stopped it last year,” I said. 

“Once the parole hearings start, it’s just a matter of time.” 

“But somebody has to fight it.” 

“Why bother? He’s gettin’ out eventually. Why piss off the Padgitts? You won’t get any 
volunteers.” 

Volunteers were indeed hard to find as the entire town ducked for cover. I had envisioned 
an angry mob packing into the parole board hearing and disrupting the meeting. 

My angry mob consisted of three people. 

Wiley Meek agreed to ride over with me, though he had no interest in speaking. If they 
were serious about banning me from the room, Wiley would sit through it and give me 
the details. Sheriff McNatt surprised us with his presence. 

Security was tight in the hall outside the hearing room. When the Board attorney saw me 
he became angry and we exchanged words. Guards in uniforms surrounded me. I was 
outnumbered and unarmed. I was escorted from the building and placed in my car, then 
watched by two thick-necked ruffians with low IQs. 

According to Wiley, the hearing went like clockwork. Lucien was there with various 
Padgitts. The Board attorney read a staff report that made Danny sound like an Eagle 
Scout. His caseworker seconded the nomination. Lucien spoke for ten minutes, the usual 
lawyerly bullshit. Danny’s father spoke last and pleaded emotionally for his son’s release. 
He was desperately needed back home, where the family had interests in timber, gravel, 
asphalt, trucking, contracting, and freight. He would have so many jobs and work so 
many hours each week that he couldn’t possibly get into more trouble. 

Sheriff McNatt gamely stood up for the people of Ford County. He was nervous and not a 
good speaker, but did a credible job of replaying the crime. Remarkably, he neglected to 
remind the Board members that a jury drawn from the same pool of people who elected 
him had been threatened by Danny Padgitt. 

By a vote of 4—1, Danny Padgitt was paroled from prison. 

*** 


Clanton was quietly disappointed. During the trial, the town had a real thirst for blood 
and was bitter when the jury didn’t deliver the death penalty. But nine years had passed, 
and since the parole hearing it had been accepted that Danny Padgitt would eventually get 
out. No one expected it so soon, but after the hearing we were over the shock. 

His release was influenced by two unusual factors. The first was that Rhoda Kassellaw 
had no family in the area. There were no grieving parents to arouse sympathy and 
demand justice. There were no angry siblings to keep the case alive. Her children were 
gone and forgotten. She had lived a lonely life and left no close friends who were willing 
to press a grudge against her murderer. 

The second was that the Padgitts lived in another world. They were so rarely seen in 
public, it was not difficult to convince ourselves that Danny would simply go to the 
island and never be seen again. What difference did it make to the people of Ford County? 
Prison or Padgitt Island? If we never saw him, we wouldn’t be reminded of his crimes. In 
the nine years since his trial, I had not seen a single Padgitt in Clanton. In my rather harsh 
editorial about his release, I said “a cold-blooded killer is once more among us.” But that 
wasn’t really true. 

The front page story and the editorial drew not a single letter from the public. Folks 
talked about the release, but not for long and not very loudly. 

Baggy eased into my office late one morning a week after Padgitt’s release, and closed 
the door, always a good sign. He’d picked up some gossip so juicy that it had to be 
delivered with the door shut. 

On a typical day I arrived for work around 11 A.M. And on a typical day he began hitting 
the sauce around noon, so we usually had about an hour to discuss stories and monitor 
rumors. 

He glanced around as if the walls were bugged, then said, “It cost the Padgitts a hundred 
grand to spring the boy.” 

The amount did not shock me, nor did the bribe itself, but I was surprised that Baggy had 
dug up this information. 

“No,” I said. This always spurred him to tell more. 

“That’s what I’m tellin’ you,” he said smugly, his usual response when he had the scoop. 

“Who got the money?” 

“That’s the good part. You won’t believe it.” 

“Who?” 


“You’ll be shocked.”
“Who?”
Slowly, he went through his extended ritual of lighting a cigarette. In the early years, I


would hang in the air as he delayed whatever dramatic news he had picked up, but with 
experience I had learned that this only slowed down the story. So I resumed my 
scribbling. 

“It shouldn’t come as a surprise, I guess,” he said, puffing and pondering. “Didn’t
surprise me at all.”
“Are you gonna tell me or not?”
“Theo.”
“Senator Morton?”


“That’s what I’m tellin’ you.”
I was sufficiently shocked, and I had to give the impression of being so or the story
would lose steam. “Theo?” I asked.


“He’s vice chairman of the Corrections Committee in the Senate. Been there forever, 
knows how to pull the strings. He wanted a hundred grand, the Padgitts wanted to pay it, 
they cut a deal, the boy walks. Just like that.” 

“I thought Theo was above taking bribes,” I said, and I was serious. This drew an
exaggerated snort.
“Don’t be so naive,” he said. Again, he knew everything.


“Where did you hear it?”
“Can’t say.” There was a chance that his poker gang had cooked up the rumor to see how
fast it would race around the square before it got back to them. But there was an equally
good chance Baggy was on to something. It really didn’t matter, though. Cash couldn’t
be traced.


***



Just when I had stopped dreaming of an early retirement, of cashing in, walking away, 
jetting off to Europe, and backpacking across Australia, just when I had resettled into my 
routine of covering stories and writing obits and hawking ads to every merchant in town, 
Mr. Gary McGrew reentered my life. And he brought his client with him. 

Ray Noble was one of three principals in a company that already owned thirty weekly 
newspapers in the Deep South and wanted to add more. Like my college friend Nick 
Diener, he had been raised in the family newspaper business and could talk the talk. He 
swore me to secrecy, then laid out his plan. His company wanted to buy the Times, along 
with the papers in Tyler and Van Buren Counties. They would sell off the equipment in 
the other two and do all the printing in Clanton because we had a better press. They 
would consolidate the accounting and much of the ad sales. Their offer of $1.2 million 
had been at the high end of the appraisal. 

Now they were offering $1.3 million. Cash. 

“After capital gains, you’ll walk away with a cool million,” Noble said. 

“I can do the math,” I said, as if I closed such deals on a weekly basis. The words “cool 
million” were rumbling through my entire body. 

They pressed a little. Offers were on the table for the other two papers, and I got the 
impression that the deal wasn’t exactly coming together as they wished. The key element 
was the Times. We had better equipment and a slightly larger circulation. 

I declined again and they left; all three of us knew it was not our last conversation. 

*** 

Eleven years after he fled Ford County, Sam Ruffin returned in much the same manner as 
he left—on a bus in the middle of the night. He’d been home for two days before I knew 
it. I arrived for my Thursday lunch and there sat Sam, rocking on the porch, with a smile 
as wide as his mother’s. Miss Callie looked and acted ten years younger now that he was 
safely back home. She fried a chicken and cooked every vegetable in her garden. Esau 
joined us and we feasted for three hours. 

Sam now had one college degree under his belt and was planning on law school. He had 
almost married a Canadian woman but things blew up over her family’s heated 
opposition to the union. Miss Callie was quite relieved to hear of the breakup. Sam had 
not mentioned the romance in letters to his mother. 


He planned to stay in Clanton for a few days, very close to home, venturing out of 
Lowtown only at night. I promised to talk to Harry Rex, to fish around and see what I 
could learn about Trooper Durant and his sons. From the legal notices we printed, I knew 
that Durant had remarried, then divorced for the second time. 

He wanted to see the town, so late that afternoon I picked him up in my Spitfire. Hiding 
under a Detroit Tigers baseball cap, he took in the sights of the small town he still called 
home. I showed him my office, my house, Bargain City, and the sprawl west of town. We 
circled the courthouse and I told him the story of the sniper and Baggy’s dramatic escape. 
Much of this he’d heard in letters from Miss Callie. 

As I dropped him off in front of the Ruffin home, he said, “Is Padgitt really out of 
prison?” 

“No one’s seen him,” I said. “But I’m sure he’s back home.” 

“Do you expect trouble?” 

“No, not really.” 

“Neither do I. But I can’t convince Momma.” 

“Nothing will happen, Sam.” 

Chapter 37 

The single shot that killed Lenny Fargarson was fired from a 30.06 hunting rifle. The 
killer could have been as far as two hundred yards away from the front porch where 
Lenny died. Thick woods began just beyond the wide lawn around the house, and there 
was a good chance whoever pulled the trigger had climbed a tree and had a perfectly 
concealed view of poor Lenny. 

No one heard the shot. Lenny was sitting on the porch, in his wheelchair, reading one of 
the many books he borrowed each week from the Clanton library. His father was 
delivering mail. His mother was shopping at Bargain City. In all likelihood, Lenny felt no 
pain and died instantly. The bullet entered the right side of his head, just over the jaw, 
and created a massive exit wound above his left ear. 

When his mother found him, he’d been dead for some time. She somehow managed to 
control herself and refrain from touching his body or the scene. Blood was all over the 
porch, even dripping onto the front steps. 


Wiley heard the report on his police scanner. He called me with the chilling


announcement, “It has begun. Fargarson, the crippled boy, is dead.”
Wiley swung by the office, I jumped in his pickup, and we were off to the crime scene.
Neither of us said a word, but we were thinking the same thing.


Lenny was still on the porch. The shot had knocked him out of his wheelchair and he lay 
on his side, with his face toward the house. Sheriff McNatt asked us not to take photos, 
and we readily complied. The paper would not have used them anyway. 

Friends and relatives were flocking over, and they were directed by the deputies to a side 
door. McNatt used his men to shield the body on the front porch. I backed away and tried 
to take in that horrible scene—cops hovering over Lenny while those who loved him tried 
to get a glimpse of him as they hurried inside to console his parents. 

When the body was finally loaded onto a gurney and placed in an ambulance, Sheriff
McNatt came over and leaned on the pickup next to me.
“Are you thinkin’ what I’m thinkin’?” he said.
“Yep.”


“Can you find me a list of the jurors?”
Though we had never printed the names of the jurors, I had the information in an old file.
“Sure,” I said.


“How long will it take you?” he asked.
“Give me an hour. What’s your plan?”
“We gotta notify those folks.”
As we were leaving, the deputies were beginning to comb the thick woods around the


Fargarson home.


***


I took the list to the Sheriff’s office, and we looked over it together. In 1977, I had 
written the obituary for juror number five, Mr. Fred Bilroy, a retired forest ranger who 
died suddenly of pneumonia. As far as I knew, the other ten were still alive. 


McNatt gave the list to three of his deputies. They dispersed to deliver news that no one 
wanted to hear. I volunteered to tell Callie Ruffin. 

She was on the porch watching Esau and Sam wage war over a game of checkers. They 
were delighted to see me, but the mood quickly changed. “I have some disturbing news, 
Miss Callie,” I said somberly. They waited. 

“Lenny Fargarson, that crippled boy on the jury with you, was murdered this afternoon.” 

She covered her mouth and fell into her rocker. Sam steadied her, then patted her 
shoulder. I gave a brief description of what happened. 

“He was such a good Christian boy,” Miss Callie said. “We prayed together before we 
began deliberating.” She wasn’t crying, but she was on the verge. Esau went to fetch her 
a blood pressure pill. He and Sam sat beside her rocker while I sat in the swing. We were 
all bunched together on the small porch, and for a long time little was said. Miss Callie 
lapsed into a long, brooding spell. 

It was a warm spring night, under a half-moon, and Lowtown was busy with kids on 
bikes, neighbors talking across fences, a rowdy basketball game under way down the 
street. A gang of ten-year-olds became infatuated with my Spitfire, and Sam finally ran 
them off. It was only the second time I had been there after dark. “Is it like this every 
night?” I finally asked. 

“Yes, when the weather’s nice,” Sam said, anxious to talk. “It was a wonderful place to 
grow up. Everybody knows everybody. When I was nine years old I broke a car 
windshield with a baseball. I turned tail and ran, ran straight home, and when I got here 
Momma was waiting on the front porch. She knew all about it. I had to walk back to the 
scene of the crime, confess, and promise to make full restitution.” 

“And you did,” Esau said. 

“Took me six months to work and save a hundred and twenty bucks.” 

Miss Callie almost smiled at the memory, but she was too preoccupied with Lenny 
Fargarson. Though she hadn’t seen him in nine years, she had fond memories of him. His 
death truly saddened her, but it was also terrifying. 

Esau fixed sweet tea with lemon, and when he returned from the inside of the house he 
quietly slid a double-barrel shotgun behind the rocker, within his reach but out of her 
sight. 

As the hours passed, the foot traffic thinned and the neighbors withdrew. I decided that if 
Miss Callie stayed at home she would be a very difficult target. There were houses next 
door and across the street. There were no hills or towers or vacant lots within sight. 


I didn’t mention this, but I’m sure Sam and Esau were having the same thoughts. When 
she was ready for bed, I said my good nights and drove back to the jail. It was crawling 
with deputies, and had the carnival-like atmosphere that only a good murder could bring. 
I couldn’t help but flash back nine years to the night Danny Padgitt was arrested and 
hauled in with blood on his shirt. 

Only two of the jurors had not been found. Both had moved, and Sheriff McNatt was 
trying to track them down. He asked about Miss Callie and I said she was safe. I did not 
tell him Sam was home. 

He closed the door to his office and said he had a favor to ask. “Tomorrow, can you go 
talk to Lucien Wilbanks?” 

“Why me?”
“Well, I could, but, personally, I can’t stand the bastard, and he feels the same way about
me.”


“Everybody hates Lucien,” I said.
“Except…”
“Except… Harry Rex?”
“Harry Rex. What if you and Harry Rex go talk to Lucien? See if he will act as go

between to the Padgitts. I mean, at some point I gotta talk to Danny, right?”
“I guess. You’re the Sheriff.”
‘Just have a chat with Lucien Wilbanks, that’s all. Feel him out. If it goes well, then


maybe I’ll talk to him. It’s different if the Sheriff goes bargin’ in at first.”
“I’d rather be lashed with a bullwhip,” I said, and I wasn’t joking.
“But you’ll do it?”
“I’ll sleep on it.”


***



Harry Rex wasn’t too thrilled with the idea either. Why should both of us get involved? 
We kicked it around over an early breakfast at the coffee shop, an unusual meal for us but 
then we didn’t want to miss the first tidal wave of downtown gossip. Not surprisingly, the 
place was packed with anxious experts who were repeating all sorts of details and 
theories about the Fargarson murder. We listened more than we talked, and left around 
eight-thirty. 

Two doors down from the coffee shop was the Wilbanks Building. As we walked by, I 
said, “Let’s do it.” 

Pre-Lucien, the Wilbanks family had been a cornerstone of Clan-ton society, commerce, 
and law. In the golden years of the last century, they owned land and banks, and all of the 
men in the family had studied law, some at real Ivy League schools. But they had been in 
decline for many years. Lucien was the last male Wilbanks of any consequence, and there 
was an excellent chance he was about to be disbarred. 

Ethel Twitty, the longtime secretary, greeted us rudely, almost sneering at Harry Rex, 
who mumbled to me under his breath, “Meanest bitch in town.” I think she heard him. It 
was obvious they had been catfighting for many years. Her boss was in. What did we 
want? 

“We want to see Lucien,” Harry Rex said. “Why else would we be here?” She rang him 
up as we waited. “I don’t have all day!” Harry Rex snapped at her at one point. 

“Go ahead,” she said, more to get rid of us than anything else. We climbed the steps. 
Lucien’s office was huge, at least thirty feet wide and long with ten-foot ceilings and a 
row of French doors overlooking the square. It was on the north side, directly across from 
the Times, with the courthouse in between. Thankfully, I couldn’t see Lucien’s balcony 
from my porch. 

He greeted us indifferently, as if we had interrupted a long serious meditation. Though it 
was early, his cluttered desk gave the impression of a man who’d worked all night. He 
had long grayish hair that ran down his neck, and an unfashionable goatee, and the tired 
red eyes of a serious drinker. “What’s the occasion?” he asked, very slowly. We glared at 
each other, both conveying as much contempt as possible. 

“Had a murder yesterday, Lucien,” Harry Rex said. “Lenny Fargarson, that crippled boy 
on the jury.” 

“I’m assuming this is off the record,” he said in my direction. 

“It is,” I said. “Completely. Sheriff McNatt asked me to stop by and say hello. I invited 
Harry Rex.” 

“So we’re just socializing?” 


“Maybe. Just having a little gossip about the murder,” I said.
“I got the details,” he said.
“Have you talked to Danny Padgitt lately?” Harry Rex asked.
“Not since he was paroled.”
“Is he in the county?”
“He’s in the state, I’m not sure exactly where. If he crosses the state line without


permission he violates the conditions of his parole.”


Why couldn’t they parole him to, say, Wyoming? It seemed odd that he would be
required to stay close to where he committed his crimes. Get rid of him!
“Sheriff McNatt would like to talk to him,” I said.
“Oh does he? Why should that concern you and me? Tell the Sheriff to go talk to him.”
“It’s not that simple, Lucien, and you know it,” Harry Rex said.
“Does the Sheriff have any proof against my client? Any evidence? Ever hear of probable


cause, Harry Rex? You can’t just round up the usual suspects, you know? Takes a little
more than that.”
“There was a direct threat against the jurors,” I said.


“Nine years ago.”
“It was still a threat, and we all remember it. Now, two weeks after he’s paroled, one of
his jurors is dead.”


“That’s not enough, fellas. Show me more and I might consult with my client. Right now 
there’s nothing but naked speculation. Plenty of it, but this town’s always good for a 
flood of gossip.” 

“You don’t know where he is, do you, Lucien?” Harry Rex said. 

“I assume he’s on the island, with the rest of them.” He used the word “them” as if they
were a bunch of rats.
“What happens if another juror gets shot?” Harry Rex pressed on.
Lucien dropped a legal pad on his desk and rested there on his elbows. “What am I


supposed to do, Harry Rex? Call the boy up, say ‘Hey, Danny, I’m sure you’re not killin’



your jurors, but, if by chance you are, then, hey, be a good boy and stop it.’ You think 
he’ll listen to me? This wouldn’t have happened if the idiot had followed my advice. I 
insisted that he not take the stand in his own defense. He’s an idiot, okay, Harry Rex! 
You’re a lawyer, God knows you’ve had idiot clients. You can’t do a damned thing to 
control them.” 

“What happens if another juror gets shot?” Harry Rex repeated. 

“Then I guess another juror will die.” 

I jumped to my feet and headed for the door. “You’re a sick bastard,” I said. 

“Not a word of this in print,” he snarled behind me. 

“Go to hell,” I yelled as I slammed his door. 

*** 

Late in the afternoon Mr. Magargel called from the funeral home and asked if I could 
hustle over. Mr. and Mrs. Fargarson were there, picking out a casket and making the final 
arrangements. As I had done many times, I met them in Parlor C, the smallest viewing 
room. It was seldom used. 

Pastor J. B. Cooper of the Maranatha Primitive Baptist Church was with them, and he 
was a saint. They leaned on him for every decision. 

At least twice a year, I met with a family after the tragic death of a loved one. It was 
almost always a car wreck or some gruesome farm injury, something unexpected. The 
surviving members were too shocked to think clearly, too wounded to make decisions. 
The strong ones simply sleepwalked through the ordeal. The weak ones were often too 
numb to do anything but cry. Mrs. Fargarson was the stronger of the two, but the horror 
of finding her son with half his head blown off had reduced her to a shuddering ghost. Mr. 
Fargarson just stared at the floor. 

Pastor Cooper gently extracted the basics, many of which he already knew. Since his 
spinal injury fifteen years earlier, Lenny had dreamed of going to heaven, of having his 
body restored, of walking every day hand in hand with his Savior. We worked on some 
language to this effect, and Mrs. Fargarson was deeply appreciative. She handed me a 
photo, one of Lenny sitting by a pond with a fishing pole. I promised to put it on the front 
page. 


As always with grieving parents, they thanked me profusely and insisted on hugging me 
tightly as I tried to leave. Mourners cling to people like that, especially at the funeral 
home. 

I stopped by Pepe’s and bought an array of Mexican carryout, then drove to Lowtown, 
where I found Sam playing basketball, Miss Callie asleep inside, and Esau guarding the 
house with his shotgun. Eventually, we ate on the porch, though she only nibbled at the 
foreign food. She wasn’t hungry. Esau said she’d eaten little during the day. 

I brought my backgammon board and taught Sam the game. Esau preferred checkers. 
Miss Callie was certain any activity that involved the rolling of dice was patently sinful, 
but she wasn’t up to a lecture. We sat for hours, deep into the night, and watched the 
rituals of Lowtown. School had just turned out for the summer, the days were longer and 
hotter. 

Buster, my part-time pit bull, drove by every half hour. He would slow in front of the 
Ruffins, I’d wave as if things were fine, he’d ease away and return to the driveway of the 
Hocutt House. A patrol car parked two doors down from the Ruffin house and sat for a 
long time. Sheriff McNatt had hired three black deputies, and two of them had been 
assigned to keep an eye on the home. 

Others were watching as well. After Miss Callie went to bed, Esau pointed across to the 
street to the darkened screened porch where the Braxtons lived. “Tully’s over there,” he 
said. “Watchin’ everythin’.” 

“He told me he’d stay up all night,” Sam said. Lowtown would be a dangerous place to 
start a gunfight. 

I left after eleven, crossed the tracks, and drove the empty streets of Clanton. The town 
pulsed with tension, with anticipation, because whatever had been started was far from 
over. 

Chapter 38 

Miss Callie insisted on attending the funeral of Lenny Fargarson. Sam and Esau objected 
strenuously, but, as always, once she made up her mind, then all conversations were over. 
I discussed this with Sheriff McNatt, who summed things up by saying, “She’s a grown 
lady.” He knew of no other jurors who planned to attend, but then it was difficult to 
monitor such things. 

I also called Pastor Cooper to forewarn him. His response was, “She will be very 
welcome in our little church. But get here early.” 


With rare exceptions blacks and whites did not worship together in Ford County. They 
fervently believed in the same Lord, but chose very different styles of worshiping him. 
The majority of whites expected to be outside the church building at five past noon on 
Sunday, and seated for lunch by twelve-thirty. Blacks really didn’t care what time the 
service broke up, or what time it began for that matter. On my church tour I visited 
twenty-seven black congregations and never saw a benediction before 1:30—3 P.M. was 
the norm. Several simply went all day, with a short break for lunch in the fellowship hall, 
then back to the sanctuary for another round. 

Such zealotry would have killed a white Christian. 

But funerals were very different. When Miss Callie, along with Sam and Esau, walked 
into the Maranatha Primitive Baptist Church, there were a few quick stares but nothing 
more. Had they walked in on a Sunday morning for regular worship, there would have 
been resentment. 

We arrived forty-five minutes early, and the lovely little sanctuary was almost filled. I 
watched through the tall open windows as the cars kept coming. A loudspeaker had been 
hung from one of the ancient oaks, and a large crowd gathered around it after the building 
was full. The choir started with “The Old Rugged Cross,” and the tears began flowing. 
Pastor Cooper’s soothing message was a gentle warning for us not to question why bad 
things happen to good people. God is always in control, and though we are too small to 
understand His infinite wisdom and majesty, He will one day reveal Himself to us. Lenny 
was with Him now, and that was where Lenny longed to be. 

They buried him behind the church, in an immaculate little cemetery inside a wroughtiron fence. Miss Callie clutched my hand and prayed fervently when the casket was 
lowered into the ground. A soloist sang “Amazing Grace,” then Pastor Cooper thanked us 
for coming. There was punch and cookies in the fellowship hall behind the sanctuary, and 
most of the crowd hung around for a few minutes to visit, or to have one last word with 
Mr. and Mrs. Fargarson. 

Sheriff McNatt caught my attention and nodded as if he wanted to talk. We walked to the 
front of the church where no one could hear us. He was in uniform with his standard 
toothpick in his mouth. “Any luck with Wilbanks?” he asked. 

“No, just the one meeting,” I said. “Harry Rex went back yesterday and got nowhere.” 

“I guess I’ll talk to him,” he said. 

“You can, but you won’t get anywhere.” 

The toothpick shifted from one side of his mouth to the other, in much the same way 
Harry Rex could slide his cigar over without missing a word. “We got nothin’ else. 


We’ve combed the woods around the house, not a track or a trace of anything. You’re not 
printin’ this, are you?” 

“No.”
“There are a bunch of ol’ loggin’ trails deep in the woods around the Fargarson place.
We’ve tiptoed everyone of ‘em, found absolutely nothin’.”


“So your only evidence is a single bullet.”
“That and a dead body.”
“Has anybody seen Danny Padgitt?”
“Not yet. I keep two cars up on 401, where it turns to go into the island. They can’t see


everything, but at least the Padgitts know we’re there. There are a hundred ways off and
on the island, but only the Padgitts know them all.”
The Ruffins were slowly moving toward us, talking to one of the black deputies.
“She’s probably the safest one,” McNatt said.
“Is anybody safe?”
“We’ll find out. He’ll try again, Willie, you mark my word. I’m convinced of it.”
“Me too.”


***


Ned Ray Zook owned four thousand acres in the eastern part of the county. He farmed 
cotton and soybeans, and his operations were large enough to maintain sufficient profits. 
He was rumored to be one of the few remaining farmers who made good money from the 
soil. It was on his property, deep in a wooded area, in a converted cattle barn, that Harry 
Rex had taken me nine years earlier to watch my first and last cockfight. 

Sometime during the early hours of June 14, a vandal entered Zook’s vast equipment 
shed and partially drained the oil from the engines of two of his big tractors. The oil was 
collected in cans and hidden among the supplies, so when the operators arrived around 6 

A.M. for the day’s work there was no sign of foul play. One operator checked the oil as 
he was supposed to do, saw the shortage, thought it odd, said nothing, and added four 

quarts. The other operator had checked his the afternoon before, as was his habit. The 
second tractor ground to a sudden halt an hour later, as its engine locked up. Its operator 
hiked half a mile back to the shed and reported the breakdown to the farm manager. 

Two hours later, a green-and-yellow service truck bounced along the field road and 
maneuvered itself close to the disabled tractor. Two servicemen slowly got out, inspected 
the hot sun and cloudless sky, then walked around the tractor for an initial look. They 
reluctantly opened up the panels of the service truck and began removing tools and 
wrenches. The sun baked them and they were soon sweating. 

To make their day somewhat more pleasant, they turned on the radio in their truck and 
cranked up the volume. Merle Haggard could be heard wafting across the soybean field. 

The music muffled the crack of a distant rifle shot. It hit Mo Teale directly in the upper 
back, ripped through his lungs, and tore a hole in his chest as it exited. Teale’s partner, 
Red, said over and over that the only thing he heard was a fierce grunt just a second or 
two before Mo fell under the front axle. He thought at first that something from the 
tractor had snapped loose in a violent way and injured Mo. Red dragged him to the truck 
and raced away, much more concerned about his buddy than what might have injured 
him. At the equipment shed, the farm manager called an ambulance, but it was too late. 
Mo Teale died there, on the concrete floor of a small, dusty office. “Mr. John Deere” 
we’d called him during the trial. Middle of the front row, bad body language. 

At the time of his death he was wearing the same type of bright yellow uniform shirt he’d 
worn every day of the trial. It made for an easy target. 

I saw him at a distance, through the open door. Sheriff McNatt allowed us inside the shed 
with the now standard prohibition against taking photos. Wiley had left his cameras in his 
pickup. 

Once again Wiley had been monitoring the police scanner when the report came across— 
»Got a shooting at Ned Ray Zook’s farm!” Wiley was always near his scanner, and in 
those days he wasn’t alone. Given the high state of anxiety in the county, every scanner 
was being listened to and every possible shooting was reason to hop in the pickup and go 
for a look. 

McNatt soon asked us to leave. His men found the cans of oil that had been drained by 
the vandal, and they found a window that had been pried open for entry into the shed. 
They would dust for fingerprints and find none. They would look for footprints on the 
gravel flooring, and find none. They would scour the woods around the soybean field and 
find no sign of the killer. In the dirt beside the tractor they did find the 30.06 shell, and it 
was quickly matched with the one that killed Lenny Fargarson. 


*** 

I hung around the Sheriff’s office until well after dark. As expected it was a busy place, 
with deputies and constables loitering about, comparing stories, creating new details. The 
phones rang nonstop. And there was a new wrinkle. Random townsfolk, unable to control 
their curiosity, began stopping by and asking anyone who would listen if there was 
anything new. 

There was not. McNatt barricaded himself in his office with his top boys and tried to 
decide what to do next. His priority was the protection of the surviving eight jurors. 
Three were already dead—Mr. Fred Bilroy (of pneumonia), and now Lenny Fargarson 
and Mo Teale. One juror had moved to Florida two years after the trial. At that moment, 
each of the eight had a patrol car parked very near their front doors. 

I left and went to the office to work on the story about the murder of Mo Teale, but I was 
sidetracked by the lights at Harry Rex’s. He was in his conference room, knee-deep in 
depositions and files and all sorts of lawyerly debris, the sight of which always gave me 
an instant headache. We grabbed two beers out of his small office refrigerator and went 
for a drive. 

In a working-class section of town known as Coventry we drove along a narrow street 
and passed a house with cars parked like fallen dominoes in the front yard. “That’s where 
Maxine Root lives,” he said. “She was on the jury.” 

I vaguely remembered Mrs. Root. Her small red-brick house had no front porch to speak 
of, so her neighbors were scattered around the carport in folding lawn chairs. Rifles were 
visible. Every light in the house was on. A patrol car was parked by the mailbox, two 
deputies leaning on its hood, smoking cigarettes and watching us very closely as we 
drove by. Harry Rex stopped and said, “Evenin’, Troy,” to one of the deputies. 

“Hey, Harry Rex,” Troy said, taking a step toward us. 

“Quite a party they got goin’, huh?” 

“It’d take a fool to start trouble around here.” 

“We’re just passin’ by,” Harry Rex said. 

“Better keep movin’,” Troy said. “They got itchy fingers.” 

“Take care.” We eased away and swung around behind the livestock barn north of town 
where a long shady lane dead-ended near the water tower. Halfway down, the street was 
lined on both sides with cars. “Who lives here?” I asked. 


“Mr. Earl Youry. He sat on the back row, farthest from the spectators.” 

A crowd was huddled on the front porch. Some sat on the steps. Others were in lawn 
chairs out on the grass. Somewhere in that pack Mr. Earl Youry was hidden and very well 
protected by his friends and neighbors. 

Miss Callie was no less defended. The street in front of her house was packed with cars 
and barely passable. Groups of men sat on the cars, some smoking, some holding rifles. 
Next door and across the street the porches and yards were filled with people. Half of 
Lowtown had gathered there to make sure she felt secure. There was a festival 
atmosphere, the feeling of a unique event. 

With white faces, Harry Rex and I received closer scrutiny. We didn’t stop until he could 
speak with the deputies, and once they approved our presence the pack relaxed. We 
parked and I walked to the house where Sam met me at the front steps. Harry Rex stayed 
behind, chatting with the deputies. 

She was inside, in her bedroom, reading her Bible with a friend from church. Several 
deacons were on the porch with Sam and Esau, and they were anxious for details of the 
Teale murder. I filled them in with as much as I could tell, which wasn’t much at all. 

Around midnight, the crowd began to slowly break up. Sam and the deputies had 
organized a rotation of all-night sentries, armed guards on both the front and back 
porches. There was no shortage of volunteers. Miss Callie never dreamed her pleasant 
and God-fearing little home would become such an armed fortress, but under the 
circumstances she could not be disappointed. 

We drove the anxious streets to the Hocutt House, where we found Buster asleep in his 
car in the driveway. We found some bourbon and sat on a front porch, swatting an 
occasional mosquito and trying to appreciate the situation. 

“He’s very patient,” Harry Rex said. “Wait a few days when all these neighbors get tired 
of porch sittin’, when everybody relaxes a little. The jurors can’t live long locked inside 
their homes. He’ll wait.” 

One chilling little fact that had not been released was a service call received by the tractor 
dealership a week earlier. At the Anderson farm south of town a tractor had been disabled 
under similar circumstances. Mo Teale, who was one of four chief mechanics, had not 
been sent to repair it. Someone else’s yellow shirt had been watched through the scope of 
a hunting rifle. 

“He’s patient and meticulous,” I agreed. Eleven days had passed between the two 
murders, and no clues had been left behind. If it was indeed Danny Padgitt, there was a 
stark contrast between his first murder—Rhoda Kassellaw—and his last two. He’d 
advanced from a brutal crime of passion to cold-blooded executions. Perhaps that’s what 


nine years in prison had taught him. He’d had plenty of time to remember the faces of the 
twelve people who’d sent him away, and to plan his revenge. 

“He’s not finished,” Harry Rex said.
One murder might be considered a random act. Two meant there was a pattern. The third
would send a small army of cops and vigilantes onto Padgitt Island for an all-out war.


“He’ll wait,” Harry Rex said. “Probably for a long time.”
“I’m thinking about selling the paper, Harry Rex,” I said.
He took a long drink of bourbon, then said, “Why would you do that?”
“Money. This company in Georgia is making a serious offer.”
“How much?”
“A lot. More than I ever dreamed of. I wouldn’t work for a long time. Maybe never.”
The idea of not working hit him hard. His daily routine was ten hours of nonstop chaos


with some very emotional and high-strung divorce clients. He often worked nights, when 
the office was quiet and he could think. He made a comfortable living, but he certainly 
scraped for every penny. “How long have you had the paper?” he asked. 

“Nine years.”
“Kinda hard to imagine the paper without you.”
“Maybe that’s a reason to sell it. I don’t want to be another Wilson Caudle.”
“What will you do?”
“Take a break, travel, see the world, find a nice lady, marry her, get her pregnant, have


some kids. This is a big house.”
“So you wouldn’t move away?”
“To where? This is home.”
Another long sip, then, “I don’t know. Let me sleep on it.” With that, he walked off the


porch and drove away.



Chapter 39 

With the bodies piling up, it was inevitable the story would attract more attention than the 
Times could give it. The next morning, a reporter I knew from the Memphis paper 
arrived in my office, and about twenty minutes later one from the Jackson paper joined us. 
Both covered northern Mississippi, where the hottest news was usually a factory 
explosion or another indicted county official. 

I gave them the background on both murders, the Padgitt parole, and the fear that had 
gripped the county. We were not competitors—they wrote for large dailies that barely 
overlapped. Most of my subscribers also took either the Memphis or Jackson papers. The 
Tupelo daily was also popular. 

And, frankly, I was losing interest; not in the current crisis, but in journalism as a 
vocation. The world was calling me. As I sat there drinking coffee and trading stories 
with those two veterans, both of whom were older than me, each of whom earned about 
$40,000 a year, I found it hard to believe that I could walk away right then with a million 
bucks. It was difficult to stay focused. 

They eventually left to pursue their own angles. A few minutes later Sam called with a 
rather urgent, “You need to come over.” 

A ragtag little unit was still guarding the Ruffin porch. All four were bleary-eyed and in 
need of sleep. Sam cleared me through the bivouac and we went to the kitchen table 
where Miss Callie was shelling butter beans, a task she always performed on the rear 
porch. She gave me a warm smile and the standard bear hug, but she was a troubled 
woman. “In here,” she said. Sam nodded and we followed her into her small bedroom. 
She closed the door behind us as if intruders were lurking, then she disappeared into a 
narrow closet. We waited awkwardly while she rattled around in there. 

She finally emerged with an old spiral notebook, one that had obviously been well hidden. 
“Something doesn’t make sense,” she said as she sat on the edge of the bed. Sam sat 
beside her and I backed into an old rocker. She was flipping through the pages of her 
handwritten notes. “Here it is,” she said. 

“We gave our solemn promises that we would never talk about what happened in the jury 
room,” she said, “but this is too important not to tell. When we found Mr. Padgitt guilty, 
the vote was quick and unanimous. But when we came to the issue of the death penalty, 
there was some opposition to it. I certainly didn’t want to send anyone to die, but I had 
promised to follow the law. Things got very heated, there were sharp words, even some 
accusations and threats. Not a pleasant thing to sit through. When the battle lines became 
clear, there were three people opposed to the death penalty, and they were not about to 
change their minds.” 


She showed me a page in her notebook. In her clear and distinctive handwriting there 
were two columns—one had nine names, the other had only three—L. Fargarson, Mo 
Teale, and Maxine Root. I gawked at the names, thinking that maybe I was looking at the 
killer’s list. 

“When did you write this?” I asked. 

“I kept notes during the trial,” she said. 

Why would Danny Padgitt be killing the jurors who refused to give him the death penalty? 
The ones who had effectively saved his life? 

“He’s killing the wrong ones, isn’t he?” Sam asked. “I mean, it’s all wrong, but if you’re 
out for revenge why go after the folks who tried to save you?” 

“As I said, it doesn’t make sense,” Miss Callie said. 

“You’re assuming too much,” I said. “You’re assuming he knows how each juror voted. 
As far as I know, and I snooped around for a long time, the jurors never told anyone how 
the vote went. The trial was overshadowed rather quickly by the desegregation order. 
Padgitt was shipped off to Parchman the same day he was found guilty. There’s a good 
chance he’s picking off the easy ones first, and Mr. Fargarson and Mr. Teale just 
happened to be more accessible.” 

“That’s very coincidental,” Sam said. 

We pondered that for a long time. I wasn’t sure if it was plausible; I wasn’t sure of 
anything. Then I had another thought: “Keep in mind, all twelve jurors voted guilty, and 
that was just after he made his threat.” 

“I suppose,” Miss Callie said, unconvinced. We were trying to make sense of something 
that was completely incomprehensible. 

“Anyway, I need to give this information to the Sheriff,” I said. 

“We promised we’d never tell.” 

“That was nine years ago, Mother,” Sam said. “And no one could have predicted what’s 
happening now.” 

“It’s especially important for Maxine Root,” I said. 

“Don’t you think some of the other jurors have come forward with this same 
information?” Sam said. 

“Maybe, but it was a long time ago. And I doubt if they kept notes.” 


There was a commotion at the front door. Bobby, Leon, and Al had arrived. They had 
met in St. Louis, then driven all night to Clanton. We had coffee around the kitchen table, 
and I filled them in on the most recent developments. Miss Callie suddenly sprang to life 
and was pondering meals and making a list of vegetables for Esau to pick. 

*** 

Sheriff McNatt was out making the rounds, visiting each juror. I had to unload on 
someone, so I barged into Harry Rex’s office and waited impatiently while he finished a 
deposition. When we were alone, I told him about Miss Callie’s list and the division of 
the jurors. He’d been haggling with a room full of lawyers for the past two hours, so he 
was in a feisty mood. 

As usual, he had a different, far more cynical theory. 

“Those three were supposed to hang the jury on guilt,” he said after a quick analysis. 
“They caved for some reason, probably thought they were doin’ the right thing by 
keepin’ him out of the gas chamber, but of course Padgitt ain’t thinkin’ that way. For nine 
years he’s been pissed because his three stooges didn’t hang the jury. He figures he’ll get 
them first, then go after the rest.” 

“There’s no way Lenny Fargarson was a stooge for Danny Padgitt,” I argued. 

“Just because he’s crippled?” 

‘Just because he was a very devout Christian.” 

“He was unemployed, Willie. He was once able to work, but he knew his condition 
would only deteriorate over the years. Maybe he needed money. Hell, everybody needs 
money. The Padgitts have trucks full of cash.” 

“I don’t buy it.” 

“It makes more sense than any of your screwball theories. What are you sayin’— 
somebody else is pickin’ off the jurors?” 

“I didn’t say that.” 

“Good, because I was about to call you a flamin’ dumb-ass.” 


“You’ve called me worse.”
“Not this morning.”
“And under your theory, Mo Teale and Maxine Root also took cash from the Padgitts,


then double-crossed Danny on the issue of guilt, then reversed themselves on the issue of 
death, and will now pay the ultimate price because they didn’t hang the jury to begin with? 
Is that what you’re saying, Harry Rex?” 

“Damned right!” 

“You’re a flaming dumb-ass, you know that? Why would an honest, hardworking, crimehating, churchgoing man like Mo Teale agree to take money from the Padgitts?”
“Maybe they threatened him.”
“Maybe! Maybe they didn’t!”
“So what’s your best theory?”
“It’s Padgitt, and it just so happens that the first two he picked off happened to be two of


the three who voted no to the death penalty. He doesn’t know how the vote went. He was 
in Parchman twelve hours after the verdict. He’s made his list. Fargarson was first 
because he was such an easy target. Teale was second because Padgitt could choose the 
setting.” 

“Who’s third?” 

“I don’t know, but these folks won’t stay locked in their homes forever. He’ll bide his
time, let things die down, then secretly start making plans again.”
“He could have some help, you know.”
“Exactly.”
Harry Rex’s phone had never stopped ringing. He glared at it during a pause, then said, “I


got work to do.”


“I guess I’ll go see the Sheriff. See you later.” I was out of his office when he yelled,
“Say, Willie. One other thing.”
I turned to face him.
“Sell it, take the money, go play for a while. You’ve earned it.”
“Thanks.”



“But don’t leave Clanton, you hear?” 

“I won’t.” 

*** 

Mr. Earl Youry ran a road grader for the county. He graded the rural roads that ran into 
very remote places, out from Possum Ridge and far beyond Shady Grove. Since he 
worked alone, it was decided that he should hang around the county barn for a few days 
where he had many friends, all of whom had rifles in their trucks and were on high alert. 
Sheriff McNatt huddled with Mr. Youry and his supervisor and worked out a plan to keep 
him safe. 

Mr. Youry called the Sheriff and said he had important information. He admitted his 
recollection was less than thorough, but he was certain that the crippled boy and Mo 
Teale had been adamant in their refusal to impose the death penalty. He remembered that 
they had a third vote, maybe it was one of the women, maybe the colored lady. He just 
couldn’t recall exactly, and, after all, it had been nine years. He posed the same question 
to McNatt—»Why would Danny Padgitt be killing the jurors who refused to give him the 
death penalty?” 

When I walked into the Sheriff’s office, he had just finished his conversation with Mr. 
Youry, and he was as bewildered as he should have been. I closed the door and relayed 
my conversation with Miss Callie. “I saw her notes, Sheriff,” I said. “The third vote was 
Maxine Root.” 

For an hour we rehashed the same arguments I’d had with Sam and Harry Rex, and again 
it made no sense. He did not believe that the Padgitts had bought or intimidated either 
Lenny or Mo Teale; he wasn’t so sure about Maxine Root since she came from a rougher 
family. He more or less agreed with me that the first two killings had been coincidental, 
and that Padgitt, in all likelihood, did not know how the jurors had voted. Interestingly, 
he claimed that he found out about a year after the verdict that it had been a 9—3 split on 
the issue of death, and that Mo Teale had become almost violently opposed to such a 
sentence. 

But, both of us conceded, with Lucien Wilbanks involved it was entirely possible Padgitt 
knew more about the deliberations than we did. Anything was possible. 

And nothing made sense. 


While I was sitting in his office, he called Maxine Root. She worked as a bookkeeper at 
the shoe factory north of town, and had insisted on going to work. McNatt had been in 
her office that morning, inspecting the place, talking with her boss and coworkers, 
making sure everyone felt safe. Two of his deputies were outside the building, watching 
for trouble and waiting to haul Maxine back home at quitting time. 

They chatted on the phone like old friends for a few minutes, then McNatt said, “Say, 
Maxine, I know that you and Mo Teale and the Fargarson boy were the only three who 
voted against the death penalty for Danny Padgitt…” He paused as she interrupted. 

“Well, it’s not important how I found out. What’s important here is that makes me real 
nervous about your safety. Extra nervous.” 

He listened to her for a few minutes. As she rambled on he interrupted occasionally with 
such things as: “Well, Maxine, I can’t just charge out there and arrest the boy.” 

And, “You tell your brothers to keep those guns in their trucks.” 

And, “I’m workin’ on the case, Maxine, and when I get enough evidence I’ll get a 
warrant for his arrest.” 

And, “It’s too late to give him the death penalty, Maxine. You did what you thought was 
right at the time.” 

She was crying when the conversation ended. “Poor thing,” McNatt said, “her nerves are 
shot to hell.” 

“Can’t really blame her,” I said. “I’m ducking under windows myself.” 

Chapter 40 

The funeral for Mo Teale was held at the Willow Road Methodist Church, number thirtysix on my list and one of my favorites. It was barely in the city limits of Clanton, south of 
the square. Because I had never met Mr. Teale, I did not go to his funeral. However, there 
were many in attendance who had never met him. 

Had he died of a heart attack at the age of fifty-one, it would have been sudden and tragic 
and his final service would have drawn an impressive crowd. But being gunned down in a 
revenge killing by a freshly paroled murderer was simply too much for the curious to 
resist. The mob included long-forgotten high school acquaintances of Mr. Teale’s four 
adult children, and meddling old widows who seldom missed a good funeral, and out-of


town reporters, and several gentlemen whose only contact with Mo was the fact that they 
owned John Deere tractors. 

I stayed away and worked on his obituary. His oldest son had been kind enough to stop 
by the office and give me the details. He was thirty-three—Mo and his wife jump-started 
their family—and he sold new Fords over in Tupelo. He stayed for almost two hours and 
desperately wanted me to assure him that Danny Padgitt was about to be hauled in and 
stoned. 

Interment was at the Clanton cemetery. The funeral procession stretched for blocks and, 
for good measure, swung by the square and proceeded down Jackson Avenue, just 
outside the Times. It did not disrupt traffic at all—everyone was at the funeral. 

*** 

Using Harry Rex as an intermediary, Lucien Wilbanks arranged a meeting with Sheriff 
McNatt. I was specifically mentioned by Lucien, and specifically not invited. Didn’t 
matter; Harry Rex took notes and told me everything, with the understanding that nothing 
would get printed. 

Also present in Lucien’s office was Rufus Buckley, the District Attorney who had 
succeeded Ernie Gaddis in 1975. Buckley was a publicity hog who, though reluctant to 
meddle in Padgitt’s parole, was now anxious to lead the mob to lynch him. Harry Rex 
despised Buckley, and the feelings were mutual. Lucien despised him too, but then 
Lucien disliked virtually everyone because everyone certainly disliked him. Sheriff 
McNatt hated Lucien, tolerated Harry Rex, and was forced to work the same side of the 
street with Buckley, though he loathed him in private. 

Given those conflicting sentiments, I was quite pleased not be invited to the meeting. 

Lucien began by saying that he had talked with both Danny Padgitt and his father, Gill. 
They had met somewhere outside of Clanton and away from the island. Danny was doing 
fine, working each day in the office of the family’s highway contracting firm, that office 
being conveniently located within the safe harbor of Padgitt Island. 

Not surprisingly, Danny denied any involvement in the murders of Lenny Fargarson and 
Mo Teale. He was shocked by what was happening and angry that he was widely 
considered to be the chief suspect. Lucien emphasized that he grilled Danny at length, 
even to the point of irritating him, and he never showed the slightest hint of dishonesty. 


Lenny Fargarson was shot on the afternoon of May 23. At that time, Danny was in his 
office, and there were four people who could vouch for his presence there. The Fargarson 
home was at least a thirty-minute drive from Padgitt Island, and the four witnesses were 
certain that Danny was either in his office or very close to it throughout the afternoon. 

“How many of these witnesses are named Padgitt?” McNatt asked. 

“We’re not giving names, yet,” Lucien said, stonewalling as any good lawyer should. 

Eleven days later, on June 3, Mo Teale was shot at approximately nine-fifteen in the 
morning. At that precise moment, Danny was standing beside a newly paved highway in 
Tippah County, getting documents signed by one of the Padgitt construction foremen. 
The foreman, along with two laborers, was willing to testify as to exactly where Danny 
was at that moment. The highway job was at least two hours away from Ned Ray Zook’s 
farm in eastern Ford County. 

Lucien presented airtight alibis for both murders, though his small audience was very 
skeptical. Of course the Padgitts would deny everything. And given their capacity to lie, 
break legs, and bribe with serious cash, they could find witnesses for anything. 

Sheriff McNatt voiced his skepticism. He explained to Lucien that his investigation was 
continuing, and if and when he had probable cause, he would get his arrest warrant and 
descend upon the island. He had spoken several times with the state police, and if a 
hundred troopers were necessary to flush out Danny, then so be it. 

Lucien said that would not be necessary. If a valid arrest warrant was obtained, he would 
do his best to bring the boy in himself. 

“And if there’s another killing,” McNatt said, “this place will erupt. You’ll have a 
thousand rednecks crossin’ the bridge and shootin’ every Padgitt they can find.” 

Buckley said that he and Judge Omar Noose had spoken twice about the killings, and he 
was reasonably confident that Noose was “almost ready” to issue a warrant for Danny’s 
arrest. Lucien attacked him with a barrage of questions about probable cause and 
sufficient evidence. Buckley argued that the threat by Padgitt during his trial was ample 
reason to suspect him of the murders. 

The meeting deteriorated as the two argued heatedly over nitpicking legalities. The 
Sheriff finally broke it up by announcing he’d heard enough and walked out of Lucien’s 
office. Buckley followed. Harry Rex hung around and chatted with Lucien in a much 
more relaxed setting. 

*** 


“You got liars protectin’ liars,” Harry Rex growled as he paced around my office an hour 
later. “Lucien tells the truth only when it sounds good, which, for him and his clientele, is 
not very often. The Padgitts have no concept of what the truth really is.” 

“Remember Lydia Vince?” I asked.
“Who?”
“The slut at the trial, the one Wilbanks put on the stand, under oath. She told the jury


Danny was in her bed when Rhoda was murdered. The Padgitts found her, bought her 
testimony, and handed her to Lucien. They’re all a bunch of lying thieves.” 

“Then her ex got shot, right?”
“Just after the trial. Probably got hit by one of the Padgitt goons. No evidence other than
the bullets. No suspects. Nothing. Sounds familiar.”


“McNatt didn’t buy anything Lucien said. Neither did Buckley.”
“And you?”
“Naw. I’ve seen Lucien cry before in front of juries. He can be very persuasive at times,


not often, but occasionally. I got the impression he was working way too hard to
convince us. It’s Danny, and he’s got some help.”
“Does McNatt believe that?”
“Yep, but he has no proof. An arrest is a waste of time.”


“It’ll keep him off the streets.”
“It’s temporary. With no proof you can’t keep him in jail forever. He’s patient. He’s been
waiting for nine years.”


***


Though the pranksters were never identified, and they had enough sense to take their 
secret to their graves, there was considerable speculation in the months that followed that 


they were the two teenaged sons of our Mayor. Two youngsters were seen sprinting away 
from the scene, much too fast to be caught. The Mayor’s boys had a long and colorful 
track record as creative and brazen jokesters. 

Under the cover of darkness, they boldly sneaked through a thick hedgerow and came to 
a stop less than fifty feet from the corner of the front porch of Mr. Earl Youry’s house. 
There they watched and listened to the crowd of friends and neighbors camped out on the 
front lawn, protecting Mr. Youry. They waited patiently for just the right moment to 
launch their attack. 

A few minutes after eleven, a long strand of eighty-four Black Cat firecrackers was 
tossed in the general direction of the porch, and when they began popping Clanton almost 
erupted into an all-out war. Men yelled, ladies screamed, Mr. Youry hit the planks and 
scurried into his house on all-fours. His sentries out front rolled over in their lawn chairs, 
clawed around for their guns, and hid low in the grass as the Blacks Cats bounced and 
popped in a smoky frenzy. It took thirty seconds for all eighty-four to finish exploding, 
and during that time a dozen heavily armed men were darting behind trees, pointing their 
guns in every direction, ready to shoot anything that moved. 

A part-time deputy named Travis was jolted from his sleep on the hood of his patrol car. 
He yanked out his.44 Magnum and dashed low and hard in the general direction of the 
Black Cats. Armed neighbors were scampering everywhere in Mr. Youry’s front yard. 
For some reason, and neither Travis nor his supervisor ever revealed the official 
explanation, if in fact there was one, he fired a shot into the air. A very loud shot. A shot 
heard well above the firecrackers. It caused another itchy finger, someone who never 
admitted to pulling the trigger, to unload a.12-gauge shotgun shell into the trees. No 
doubt many others would have commenced firing and who knows how many might have 
been slaughtered had not the other part-time deputy, Jimmy, screamed loudly, “Hold your 
fire, you idiots!” 

At which point the gunfire ceased immediately, but the Black Cats had a few rounds left. 
When the last one popped the entire gang of vigilantes walked over to the smoldering 
patch of grass and inspected things. Word spread that it was just fireworks. Mr. Earl 
Youry pecked through the front door and eventually eased outside. 

Down the street, Mrs. Alice Wood heard the assault and was running to the rear of her 
house to lock the door when the two youngsters blew by her back entrance, sprinting and 
laughing furiously. She would report that they were about fifteen and white. 

A mile away, in Lowtown, I had just walked down the steps of Miss Callie’s front porch 
when I heard the distant explosions. The late shift—Sam, Leon, and two deacons— 
jumped to their feet and gazed into the distance. The forty-four sounded like a howitzer. 
We waited and waited, and when all was still again Leon said, “Sounds like firecrackers.” 

Sam had sneaked inside to check on his mother. He came back and said, “She’s asleep.” 


“I’ll go check it out,” I said. “And I’ll call if it’s anything important.” 

Mr. Youry’s street was alive with the red and blue lights of a dozen police cars. Traffic 
was heavy as the other curious fought to get near the scene. I saw Buster’s car parked in a 
shallow ditch, and when I found him a few minutes later he told me the story. “Coupla 
kids,” he said. 

I found it funny, but I was in the distinct minority. 

Chapter 41 

In the nine years since I’d bought the Times, I had never left it for more than four days. It 
went to press every Tuesday, was published every Wednesday, and by every Thursday of 
my life I was facing a formidable deadline. 

One reason for its success was the fact that I wrote so much about so many in a town 
where so little happened. Each edition had thirty-six pages. Subtracting five for 
classifieds, three for legals, and about six for advertisements, I was faced each week with 
the task of filling approximately twenty-two pages with local news. 

The obits consumed at least one page, with me in charge of every word. Davey Bigmouth 
Bass took two pages for sports, though I often had to help with a summary of a junior 
high football game or an urgent story about a trophy buck shot by some twelve-year-old. 
Margaret put together one page for Religion and one page for Weddings and another for 
classifieds. Baggy, whose production nine years earlier had been feeble at best, had 
succumbed almost completely to booze and was now good for only one story each week, 
which, of course, he always wanted on the front page. Staff reporters came and went with 
frustrating regularity. We usually had one on board, sometimes two, and they were often 
more trouble than they were worth. I had to proofread and edit their work to the point of 
wishing I had simply done it myself. 

And so I wrote. Though I’d studied journalism, I had not noticed a propensity to produce 
vast amounts of words in short periods of time. But once I suddenly owned the paper, and 
it was time to sink or swim, I discovered an amazing ability to crank out windy and 
colorful stories about almost everything, and nothing. A moderately severe car wreck 
with no fatalities was front page news with breathless quotes from eyewitnesses and 
ambulance drivers. A small factory expansion sounded like a boon to the nation’s Gross 
National Product. A bake sale at the Baptist Ladies’ WMU could run for eight hundred 
words. A drug arrest sounded as if the Colombians were advancing unchecked upon the 
innocent children of Clanton. A blood drive by the Civitan Club carried the urgency of a 
wartime shortage. Three stolen pickups in one week had the feel of organized crime. 


I wrote about the people of Ford County. Miss Callie’s was my first human interest story, 
and over the years I tried to run at least one a month. There was a survivor of the Bataan 
death march, the last local veteran of World War I, a sailor who had been at Pearl Harbor, 
a retiring minister who’d served one small country congregation for forty-five years, an 
old missionary who’d lived for thirty-one years in the Congo, a recent graduate who was 
dancing in a musical on Broadway, a lady who’d lived in twenty-two states, a man who’d 
been married seven times and was anxious to share his advice with future newlyweds, Mr. 
Mitlo—our token immigrant, a retiring basketball coach, the short-order cook at the Tea 
Shoppe who’d been frying eggs forever. And on and on. These stories were immensely 
popular. 

However, after nine years the list of interesting people in Ford County had very few 
names on it. 

I was tired of writing. Twenty pages a week, fifty-two weeks a year. 

I woke up each morning thinking of either a new story or a new angle for an old one. Any 
bit of news or any unusual event was inspiration to puff up a piece and stick it 
somewhere in the paper. I wrote about dogs, antique trucks, a legendary tornado, a 
haunted house, a missing pony, Civil War treasure, the legend of a headless slave, a rabid 
skunk. And all the usual stuff—court proceedings, elections, crime, new businesses, 
bankrupt businesses, new characters in town. I was tired of writing. 

And I was tired of Clanton. With some reluctance the town had come to accept me, 
especially when it became obvious I wasn’t leaving. But it was a very small place, and at 
times I felt suffocated. I spent so many weekends at home, with little to do but read and 
write, that I became accustomed to it. And that frustrated me greatly. I tried the poker 
nights with Bubba Crocket and the Foxhole gang, and the redneck cook-outs with Harry 
Rex and company. But I never felt as though I belonged. 

Clanton was changing, and I was not happy with its direction. Like most small towns in 
the South, it was sprawling in all directions with no plan for its growth. Bargain City was 
booming, and the area around it was attracting every fast-food franchise imaginable. 
Downtown was declining, though the courthouse and the county government would 
always draw people. Strong political leaders were needed, folks with vision, and they 
were in short supply. 

On the other hand, I suspected the town was weary of me. Because of my preachy 
opposition to the war in Vietnam, I would always be considered a radical liberal. And I 
did little to diminish this reputation. As the paper grew and the profits increased, and as a 
direct result my skin got thicker, I editorialized more and more. I railed against closed 
meetings held by the city council and the county Board of Supervisors. I sued to get 
access to public records. I spent one year bitching about the almost complete lack of 
zoning and land-use management in the county, and when Bargain City came to town I 
said way too much. I ridiculed the state’s campaign finance laws, which were designed to 


allow rich people to elect their favorites. And when Danny Padgitt was set free, I 
unloaded on the parole system. 

Throughout the seventies, I was always on a soapbox. And while this made for interesting 
reading and sold papers, it also transformed me into something of an oddity. I was 
viewed as a malcontent, one with a pulpit. I don’t think I was ever a bully, I tried hard not 
to be. But looking back, there were fights I started not only out of conviction but also out 
of boredom. 

As I grew older, I wanted to be a regular citizen. I would always be an outsider, but that 
didn’t bother me anymore. I wanted to come and go, to live in Clanton as I saw fit, then 
leave for long periods of time when I got bored. Amazing how the prospect of money can 
change your future. 

I became consumed with the dream of walking away, of taking a sabbatical to some place 
I’d never been, of seeing the world. 

The next meeting with Gary McGrew was at a restaurant in Tupelo. He’d been to my 
office several times. One more visit and the staff would start whispering. Over lunch we 
again looked at my books, talked about his client’s plans, negotiated this point and that 
one. If I sold, I wanted the owner to honor the new five-year contracts I’d given to Davey 
Bigmouth Bass, Hardy, and Margaret. Baggy would either retire soon or die of liver 
poisoning. Wiley had always been a part-timer, and his interest in chasing subjects for 
photos was waning. He was the only employee I’d told about the negotiations, and he had 
encouraged me to take the money and run. 

McGrew’s client wanted me to stay on for at least a year, at a very high salary, and train 
the new editor. I would not agree to this. If I walked away, then I walked away. I didn’t 
want a boss, and I didn’t want the local heat that would come for selling the county’s 
paper to a large firm from outside the state. 

Their offer was at $1.3 million. A consultant I’d hired in Knoxville had valued the Times 
at $1.35 million. 

“Confidentially, we’ve bought the papers in Tyler and Van Buren Counties,” McGrew 
said, late in a very long lunch. “Things are falling into place.” 

He was being almost completely honest. The owner of the paper in Tyler County had 
agreed in principle, but the documents had not been signed. 

“But there’s a new wrinkle,” he said. “The paper in Polk County might be for sale. 
Frankly, we’re taking a look at it if you pass. It’s quite a bit cheaper.” 

“Ah, more pressure,” I said. 


The Polk County Herald had four thousand readers and lousy management. I saw it every
week.
“I’m not trying to pressure you. I’m just putting everything on the table.”
“I really want a million and a half bucks,” I said.


“That’s over the top, Willie.”
“It’s high, but you’ll earn it back. Might take a little longer, but look ten years down the
road.”


“I’m not sure we can go that high.”
“You’ll have to if you want the paper.”
A sense of urgency had arisen. McGrew hinted at a deadline, then finally said, “We’ve


been talking for months now, and my client is anxious to reach a conclusion. He wants to


close the deal by the first of next month, or he’ll go elsewhere.”
The tactic didn’t bother me. I was tired of talking too. Either I sold, or I didn’t. It was
time to make a decision.


“That’s twenty-three days from now,” I said.
“It is.”
“Fair enough.”


***


The long days of summer arrived, and the insufferable heat and humidity settled in for 
their annual three-month stay. I made my usual rounds—to the churches on my list, to the 
softball fields, to the local golf tournament, to the watermelon cuttings. But Clanton was 
waiting, and the wait was all we talked about. 

Inevitably, the noose around the neck of each remaining juror was loosened somewhat. 
They quite naturally got tired of being prisoners in their homes, of altering their lifelong 
routines, of having packs of neighbors guard their homes at night. They began to venture 
out, to try and resume normal lives. 


The patience of the killer was unnerving. He had the advantage of time, and he knew his 
victims would grow weary of all that protection. He knew they would drop their guard, 
make a mistake. We knew it too. 

After missing three consecutive Sundays, for the first time in her life, Miss Callie insisted 
on going to church. Escorted by Sam, Esau, and Leon, she marched into the sanctuary on 
Sunday morning and worshiped the Lord as if she’d been gone a year. Her brothers and 
sisters embraced her, and prayed for her fervently. Reverend Small revised his sermon on 
the spot and preached on God’s protection of his followers. Sam said he went on for 
almost three hours. 

Two days later, Miss Callie slid into the backseat of my Mercedes. With Esau beside her 
and Sam riding shotgun, we hurried out of Clan-ton with a deputy behind us. He stopped 
at the county line, and an hour later we were in Memphis. There was a new shopping 
mall east of town that was all the rage, and Miss Callie dreamed of seeing it. Over a 
hundred stores under one roof! For the first time in her life, she ate a pizza; she saw an 
ice rink, two men holding hands, and a mixed-race family. She approved only of the ice 
rink. 

After a full hour of Sam’s atrocious navigating, we finally found the cemetery in south 
Memphis. Using a map from the guardhouse, we eventually located the grave of Nicola 
Rossetti DeJarnette. Miss Callie placed a bouquet of flowers she’d brought from home on 
the grave, and when it became apparent she planned to spend some time there, we walked 
away and left her in peace. 

In memory of Nicola, Miss Callie wanted Italian food. I had reserved a table at Grisanti’s, 
a Memphis landmark, and we had a long, delightful dinner of lasagna and ravioli stuffed 
with goat cheese. She managed to overcome her bias against bought food, and, to protect 
her from sin, I insisted on paying for it. 

We didn’t want to leave Memphis. For a few hours we had escaped the fear of the 
unknown and the anxiety of the waiting. Clanton seemed athousand miles away, and that 
was too close. Going back late that night, I found myself driving slower and slower. 

Though we didn’t discuss it, and the conversation grew quieter the closer we got to home, 
there was a killer loose in Ford County. Miss Callie’s name was on his list. If not for the 
two dead bodies, that would have been impossible to believe. 

According to Baggy, and verified by research in the Times archives, there had been no 
unsolved murders that century. Almost every killing had been some impulsive act where 
the smoking gun had been seen by witnesses. Arrests, trials, and convictions had been 
prompt. Now, there was a very smart and very deliberate killer out there, and every one 
knew his intended victims. For such a law-abiding, God-fearing community, it was 
inconceivable. 


Bobby, Al, Max, and Leon had, at various times, argued strenuously for Miss Callie to go 
stay with any of them for a month or so. Sam and I, and even Esau, had joined in these 
rather vigorous requests, but she would not budge. She was in close contact with God, 
and he would protect her. 

In nine years, the only time I lost my temper with Miss Callie, and the only time she 
rebuked me, was during an argument about spending a month in Milwaukee with Bobby. 
“Those big cities are dangerous,” she had said. 

“No place is as dangerous as Clanton right now,” I had replied. 

Later, when I raised my voice, she told me she did not appreciate my lack of respect, and 
I quickly shut up. 

As we crossed into Ford County late that night, I began watching my rearview mirror. It 
was silly, but then it wasn’t. In Lowtown, the Ruffin home was guarded by a deputy 
parked in the street, and a friend of Esau’s on the porch. 

“It’s been a quiet night,” the friend said. In other words, no one had been shot or shot at. 

Sam and I played checkers for an hour on the porch while she went to sleep. 

The waiting continued. 

Chapter 42 

Nineteen seventy-nine was a year for local elections in Mississippi, my third as a 
registered voter. It was much quieter than the first two. The Sheriff’s race was 
uncontested, something that was unheard of. There had been a rumor that the Padgitts had 
bought a new candidate, but after the parole debacle they backed off. Senator Theo 
Morton drew an opponent who brought me an ad that screamed the question—WHY DID 
SENATOR MORTON GET DANNY PADGITT PAROLED? CASH! THAT’S WHY! 
As much as I wanted to run the ad, I had neither the time nor the energy for a libel suit. 

There was a constable’s race out in Beat Four with thirteen candidates, but other than that 
the races were fairly lethargic. The county was fixated on the murders of Fargarson and 
Teale, and, more important, on who might be next. Sheriff McNatt and the investigators 
from the state police and state crime lab had exhausted every possible clue and lead. All 
we could do was wait. 

As July Fourth approached, there was a noticeable lack of excitement about the annual 
celebration. Though almost everyone felt safe, there was a dark cloud hanging over the 


county. Oddly, rumors persisted that something bad would happen when we all gathered 
around the courthouse on the Fourth. Rumors, though, had never been born with such 
creativity, nor spread as rapidly, as in the month of June. 

*** 

On June 25, in a fancy law office in Tupelo, I signed a pile of documents that transferred 
ownership of the Times to a media company owned in part by Mr. Ray Noble of Atlanta. 
Mr. Noble handed me a check for $1.5 million, and I quickly, and somewhat anxiously, 
walked it down the street, where my newest friend, Stu Holland, was waiting in his rather 
spacious office in the Merchants Bank. News of such a deposit in Clanton would leak 
overnight, so I buried the money with Stu, then drove home. 

It was the longest one-hour drive of my life. It was exhilarating because I had cashed in at 
the market’s peak. I had squeezed top dollar out of a well-heeled and honorable buyer 
who planned to make few changes to my newspaper. Adventure was calling me, and I 
now had the means to answer. 

And it was a sad drive because I was giving up such a large and rewarding part of my life. 
The paper and I had grown and matured together; me as an adult, it as a prosperous entity. 
It had become what any small-town paper should be—a lively observer of current events, 
a recorder of history, an occasional commentator on politics and social issues. As for me, 
I was a young man who had blindly and doggedly built something from scratch. I 
suppose I should’ve felt my age, but all I wanted to do was find a beach. Then a girl. 

When I returned to Clanton, I walked into Margaret’s office, closed the door, and told her 
about the sale. She burst into tears, and before long my eyes were moist as well. Her 
fierce loyalty had always amazed me, and though she, like Miss Callie, worried way too 
much about my soul, she had grown to love me nonetheless. I explained that the new 
owners were wonderful people, planned no drastic changes, and had approved her new 
five-year contract at an increased salary. This made her cry even more. 

Hardy did not cry. By then he had been printing the Times for almost thirty years. He was 
moody, cantankerous, drank too much like most pressmen, and if the new owners didn’t 
like him then he’d simply quit and go fishing. He did appreciate the new contract though. 

As did Davey Bigmouth Bass. He was shocked at the news, but rallied nicely at the idea 
of earning more money. 


Baggy was on vacation somewhere out West, with his brother, not his wife. Mr. Ray 
Noble had been reluctant to agree to another five years’ of Baggy’s sluggish reporting, 
and I could not, in good conscience, make him a part of the deal. Baggy was on his own. 

We had five other employees, and I personally broke the news to each of them. It took all 
of one afternoon, and when if it was finally over I was drained. I met Harry Rex in the 
back room at Pepe’s and we celebrated with margaritas. 

I was anxious to leave town and go somewhere, but it would be impossible until the 
killings stopped. 

*** 

For most of June, the Ruffin professors scrambled back and forth to Clanton. They 
juggled assignments and vacations, trying their best to make sure at least two or three of 
them were always with Miss Callie. Sam seldom left the house. He stayed in Lowtown to 
protect his mother, but also to keep his own profile low. Trooper Durant was still around, 
though he was married again and his two renegade sons had left the area. 

Sam spent hours on the porch, reading voraciously, playing checkers with Esau or 
whoever stopped by to help guard things for a while. He played backgammon with me 
until he figured out the strategy, then he insisted that we bet a dollar per game. Before 
long I owed him $50. Such blatant gambling was a deadly secret on Miss Callie’s porch. 

A hasty reunion was put together for the week before July Fourth. Because my house had 
five empty bedrooms and a woeful lack of human activity, I insisted that it be filled with 
Ruffins. The family had grown considerably since I first met them in 1970. All but Sam 
were married, and there were twenty-one grandchildren. The total came to thirty-five 
Ruffins, not counting Sam, Callie, and Esau, and thirty-four made it to Clanton. Leon’s 
wife had a sick father in Chicago. 

Of the thirty-four, twenty-three moved into the Hocutt House for a few days. They drifted 
in from different parts of the country, mostly up North, coming in shifts at all hours of the 
day, with each new arrival greeted with great ceremony. When Carlota and her husband 
and two small children arrived at 3 A.M. from Los Angeles, every light in the house 
came on and Bobby’s wife, Bonnie, began cooking pancakes. 

Bonnie took over my kitchen, and three times a day I was sent to the grocery store with a 
list of things she urgently needed. I bought ice cream by the ton and the kids soon learned 
I would fetch it for them at any hour of the day. 


Since my porches were long and wide and seldom used, the Ruffins gravitated toward 
them. Sam brought Miss Callie and Esau over late in the afternoons for serious visiting. 
She was desperate to get out of Low-town. Her warm little house had become a prison. 

At various times, I heard her children talk with great concern about their mother. The 
obvious threat of somehow getting shot was discussed less than her health. Over the years 
she had managed to lose somewhere around eighty pounds, depending on whose version 
you heard. Now it was back, and her blood pressure had the doctors concerned. The stress 
was taking its toll. Esau said she slept fitfully, something she blamed on medications. She 
was not as spry, didn’t smile as much, and had noticeably less energy. 

It was all blamed on the “Padgitt mess.” As soon as he got caught and the killings 
stopped, then Miss Callie would bounce back. 

That was the optimistic view, the one generally shared by most of her children. 

On July 2, a Monday, Bonnie and company prepared a light lunch of salads and pizzas. 
All available Ruffins were there, and we ate on a side porch under slow-moving and 
practically useless wicker fans. There was a slight breeze, however, and with the 
temperature in the nineties we were able to enjoy a long lazy meal. 

I had yet to find the right moment to tell Miss Callie that I was leaving the paper. I knew 
she would be shocked, and very disappointed. But I could think of no reason why we 
couldn’t continue our Thursday lunches. It might even be more fun counting the typos 
and mistakes made by someone else. 

In nine years we had missed only seven, all due to illness or dental work. 

The lazy postmeal chatter suddenly came to a halt. There were sirens in the distance, 
somewhere across town. 

*** 

The box was twelve inches square, five inches deep, white in color with red and blue 
stars and stripes. It was gift package from the Bolan Pecan Farm in Hazelhurst, 
Mississippi, sent to Mrs. Maxine Root by her sister in Concord, California. An 
Independence Day gift of real American pecans. It came by mail, delivered by the 
postman around noon, placed in the mailbox of Maxine Root, then hauled inside, past the 
lone sentry sitting under a tree in the front yard, and into the kitchen where Maxine first 
saw it. 


It had been almost a month since Sheriff McNatt had quizzed her about her vote on the 
jury. She had reluctantly admitted that she had not been in favor of the death penalty for 
Danny Padgitt, and she recalled that the two men who stuck with her were Lenny 
Fargarson and Mo Teale. Since they were now dead, McNatt had delivered the grave 
news that she might be the next victim. 

For years after the trial, Maxine had wrestled with the verdict. The town was bitter over it 
and she felt the hostility. Thankfully, the jurors kept their vows of silence, and she and 
Lenny and Mo avoided any additional abuse. With the soothing passage of time, she had 
been able to distance herself from the aftermath. 

Now the world knew how she’d voted. Now a crazy man was stalking her. She was on 
leave from her job as a bookkeeper. Her nerves were shot; she couldn’t sleep; she was 
sick of hiding in her own home; sick of a yard full of neighbors gathering every night as 
if it was time for a social event; sick of ducking under every window. She was taking so 
many different pills that they were all counteracting each other to the point that nothing 
worked. 

She saw the box of pecans and started crying. Someone out there loved her. Her precious 
sister Jane was thinking about her. Oh how she’d love to be in California with Jane at that 
very moment. 

Maxine started to open the package, then had a thought. She went to the phone and dialed 
Jane’s number. They had not talked in a week. 

Jane was at work, thrilled to hear from her. They chatted about this and that, then about 
the horrible situation in Clanton. “You’re a dear to send the pecans,” Maxine said. 

“What pecans?” Jane asked. 

A pause. “The gift box from Bolan Pecans down in Hazelhurst. A big one, three pounds.” 

Another pause. “Not me, sis. Must’ve been someone else.” 

Maxine hung up moments later and examined the box. A sticker on the front said—A 
Gift from Jane Parham. Of course she knew of no other Jane Parhams. 

Very gently, she picked it up. It seemed a bit heavy for a three-pound tin of pecans. 

Travis, the part-time deputy, happened by the house. He was accompanied by one Teddy 
Ray, a pimple-faced boy with an oversized uniform and a service revolver that he had 
never fired. Maxine hustled them into the kitchen where the red, white, and blue box sat 
benignly on the counter. The lone sentry was also tagging along, and for a long minute or 
so the four of them just stared at the package. Maxine recounted verbatim her 
conversation with Jane. 


With great hesitation, Travis picked up the box and shook it slightly. “Seems a might 
heavy for pecans,” he observed. He looked at Teddy Ray, who’d already gone pale, and 
at the neighbor with a rifle, who seemed ready to duck at anything. 

“You think it’s a bomb?” the neighbor asked.
“Oh my God,” Maxine mumbled and appeared ready to collapse.
“Could be,” Travis said, then gawked down in horror at what he was holding.
“Get it outside,” Maxine said.
“Shouldn’t we call the Sheriff?” Teddy Ray managed to ask.
“I guess so,” Travis said.
“What if it’s got a timer or something?” asked the neighbor.
Travis hesitated for a moment, then with the voice of absolutely no experience, said, “I


know what to do.”
They stepped through the kitchen door onto a narrow porch that ran the length of the rear


of the house. Travis carefully placed the box at the very edge, three feet or so above the 
ground. When he removed his.44 Magnum, Maxine said, “What are you doing?” 
“We’re gonna see if it’s a bomb,” Travis said. Teddy Ray and the neighbor scurried off 

the porch and took up a safe position in the grass about fifty feet away.
“You’re gonna shoot my pecans?” Maxine asked.
“You got a better idea?” Travis snapped back.
“I guess not.”
With most of his body inside the kitchen, Travis leaned out through the screen door with


his thick right arm, and his rather large head, and took aim. Maxine was right behind him,


crouching low and peeking around his waist.
The first shot missed the porch entirely, though it took the breath out of Maxine. Teddy
Ray shouted, “Nice shot,” and he and the neighbor had a quick laugh.


Travis aimed and fired again.
The explosion ripped the porch completely from the house, tore a gaping hole in the back
wall behind the kitchen, and sprayed shrapnel for a hundred yards. It shattered windows,
peeled up planks, and it wounded the four observers. Teddy Ray and the neighbor both



took bits of metal in their chests and legs. Travis’s right arm and his firing hand were 
mangled. Maxine was hit twice in the head—one piece of glass ripped off the lobe of her 
right ear, and a small nail penetrated her right jaw. 

For a moment, they were all unconscious, knocked silly by three pounds of plastic 
explosives packed with nails, glass, and ball bearings. 

***


As the sirens continued to wail across town, I went to the phone and called Wiley Meek. 
He was just about to call me. “They tried to blow up Maxine Root,” he said. 

I told the Ruffins there’d been an accident and left them on the porch. When I got near 
the subdivision where the Roots lived, the main roads were blocked and traffic was being 
turned away. I hustled over to the hospital and found a young doctor I knew. He said that 
there were four injured, none of whom appeared to be in grave danger. 

*** 

Judge Omar Noose was holding court in Clanton that afternoon. In fact, he later said that 
he heard the explosion. Rufus Buckley and Sheriff McNatt met with him for over an hour 
in chambers, and what they discussed was never revealed. As we waited in the courtroom, 
Harry Rex and most of the other lawyers loitering there were certain that they were 
debating how to handle an arrest warrant for Danny Padgitt when there was so little proof 
that he’d done anything wrong. 

But something had to be done. Someone had to be arrested. The Sheriff had a population 
to protect; he had to take action, even if it wasn’t entirely proper. 

We got a report that Travis and Teddy Ray had been transported to one of the hospitals in 
Memphis for surgery. Maxine and her neighbor were under the knife at that very moment. 
Again, it was the opinion of the doctors that no life was in jeopardy. Travis might lose his 
right arm, though. 

How many people in Ford County knew how to make package bombs? Who had access 
to explosives? Who had motive? As we argued these questions in the courtroom, they 


were evidently being argued back in chambers as well. Noose, Buckley, and McNatt were 
all elected officials. The good people of Ford County needed their protection. Since 
Danny Padgitt was the only conceivable suspect, Judge Noose finally issued a warrant for 
his arrest. 

Lucien was notified, and he took the news without objection. At that moment, not even 
Padgitt’s lawyer could argue with the strategy of bringing him in for processing. He 
could always be released later. 

A few minutes after 5 P.M… a convoy of police cars blew out of Clan-ton and headed for 
Padgitt Island. Harry Rex now owned a police scanner (there were quite a few new ones 
in town) and we sat in his office, sipping beer, listening to it squawk with unchecked fury. 
It had to be the most exciting arrest in the history of our county, and many of us wanted 
to be there. Would the Padgitts block the road and thwart the arrest? Would there be 
gunfire? A small war? 

From the chatter, we were able to follow most of what was happening. At Highway 42, 
McNatt and his men were met by ten “units” of the state highway patrol. We assumed a 
“unit” meant nothing more than a car, but it sounded far more serious. They proceeded to 
Highway 401, turned onto the county road that led to the island, and at the bridge where 
everyone expected some dramatic showdown, there sat Danny Padgitt in the car with his 
lawyer. 

The voices on the scanner were quick and anxious: 

“He’s with his lawyer!” 

“Wilbanks?” 

“Yep.” 

“Let’s shoot both of them.” 

“They’re gettin’ out of the car.” 

“Wilbanks is holdin’ up his hands. Smart-ass!” 

“It’s Danny Padgitt, all right. Hands held high.” 

“I’d like to knock that smile off his face.” 

“They got the cuffs on him.” 

“Dammit!” Harry Rex yelled across his desk. “I wanted some gunfire. Just like in the old 
days.” 


*** 

We were at the jail an hour later when the parade of red and blue lights came swarming in. 
Sheriff McNatt had wisely placed Padgitt in the patrol car of a state trooper; otherwise his 
deputies might have roughed him up during the ride. Two of their colleagues were in 
surgery in Memphis, and feelings were pretty raw. 

A mob had gathered outside the jail. Padgitt was jeered and cursed as he was rushed 
inside, then the Sheriff angrily told the hotheads to go home. 

Seeing him in handcuffs brought a great sense of relief. And the news that he was in 
custody was like a balm for the entire county. The heavy cloud had been lifted. Clanton 
came to life that night. 

When I returned to the Hocutt House after dark, the Ruffin clan was in a festive mood. 
Miss Callie was as relaxed as I’d seen her in a long time. We sat on the porch for a long 
time, telling stories, laughing, listening to Aretha Franklin and the Temptations, even 
listening to an occasional burst of fireworks. 

Chapter 43 

Unknown to anyone, Lucien Wilbanks and Judge Noose struck a deal in the hectic hours 
before the arrest. The Judge was worried about what might happen if Danny Padgitt 
chose to retreat into the safety of the island, or, worse, resist the arrest with force. The 
county was a powder keg waiting for a match. The cops were ready for blood because of 
Teddy Ray and Travis, whose gunslinging stupidity was being temporarily ignored while 
they recovered from their wounds. And Maxine Root came from a notoriously rough 
family of loggers, a large fierce clan known to hunt year round, live off their land, and 
leave no grudge unchallenged. 

Lucien appreciated the situation. He agreed to deliver his client on one condition—he 
wanted an immediate bail hearing. He had at least a dozen witnesses who were willing to 
provide “airtight” alibis for Danny, and Lucien wanted the folks in Clanton to hear their 
testimony. He truly believed that someone else was behind the killings, and it was 
important to convince the town. 


Lucien was also one month away from being disbarred in an unrelated mess. He knew the 
end was coming, and the bail hearing would be his last performance. 

Noose agreed to a hearing and set it for 10 a.m. the next day, July 3. In a scene eerily 
reminiscent of one nine years earlier, Danny Padgitt once again packed the Ford County 
Courthouse. It was a hostile crowd, anxious to get a look at him, hopeful that he might be 
strung up on the spot. Maxine Root’s family arrived early and sat near the front. They 
were angry, thick-chested, bearded men in overalls. They frightened me, and we were 
ostensibly on the same side. Maxine was reported to be resting well and expected home 
in a few days. 

The Ruffins had little to do that morning, so the excitement at the courthouse could not 
be missed. Miss Callie herself insisted on arriving early and getting a good seat. She was 
happy to be downtown again. She wore a Sunday dress and delighted in sitting in such a 
public gathering surrounded by her family. 

The reports from the hospital in Memphis were mixed. Teddy Ray had been sewn 
together and was recuperating. Travis had had a rough night, and there was much concern 
about saving his arm. Their comrades were in the courtroom in full force, waiting for 
another chance to scowl at the bomb maker. 

I saw Mr. and Mrs. Fargarson sitting in the rear, two rows from the back, and I couldn’t 
begin to comprehend what they were thinking. 

There were no Padgitts present; they had enough sense to stay clear of the courtroom. 
The sight of one of them would’ve touched off a riot. Harry Rex whispered that they 
were huddled together upstairs in the jury room, with the door locked. We never saw 
them. 

Rufus Buckley arrived with his entourage to represent the State of Mississippi. One 
advantage in selling the Times was that I would never be forced to spend time with him. 
He was arrogant and pompous, and everything he did was designed to get him to the 
Governor’s office. 

As I waited and watched the courtroom fill up, I realized it was the last time I would 
cover such a proceeding for the Times. I found no sadness in that. I had mentally checked 
out, mentally spent some of the money. And now that Danny was in custody, I was even 
more anxious to escape Clanton and go see the world. 

There would be a trial in a few months. Another Danny Padgitt circus, but I doubted 
seriously if it would be held in Ford County. I didn’t care. It would be a story for 
someone else. 

At 10 A.M… all seats were filled and a thick row of spectators lined the walls. Fifteen 
minutes later, there was a shuffle behind the bench, a door opened, and Lucien Wilbanks 


emerged. It had the feel of a sporting event; he was a player; we all wanted to boo. Two 
bailiffs quickly followed him, and one announced, “All rise for the Court!” 

Judge Noose ambled forth in his black robe and sat on his throne. “Please be seated,” he 
said into the microphone. He surveyed the crowd and seemed astonished at the number of 
us out there. 

He nodded, a side door opened, and Danny Padgitt, handcuffed, shackled at the ankles, 
and sporting the orange jail jumpsuit he’d worn before, was led in by three deputies. It 
took a few minutes to unlock him from his various restraints, and when he was finally 
free he leaned over and whispered something to Lucien. 

“This is a bail hearing,” Noose announced, and the courtroom was still and quiet. 
“There’s no reason why it cannot be handled judiciously and briefly.” 

It would be much briefer than anyone anticipated. 

*** 

A cannon exploded somewhere above us, and for a split second I thought we’d all been 
shot. Something cracked sharply through the heavy air of the courtroom, and for a town 
so jittery to begin with we all froze in one horrible snapshot of disbelief. Then Danny 
Padgitt grunted in a delayed reaction, and all hell broke loose. Women screamed. Men 
screamed. Someone yelled, “Get down!” as half the spectators ducked low, some hitting 
the floor. Someone shouted, “He’s been shot!” 

I lowered my head a few inches, but I didn’t want to miss anything. Every deputy yanked 
out a service revolver and looked in a different direction for someone to shoot. They 
pointed up and down, front and back, here and there. 

Though we argued about it for years, the second shot was no more than three seconds 
behind the first. It hit Danny in the ribs, but it had not been necessary. The first had gone 
through his head. The second shot drew the attention of a deputy in the front of the 
courtroom. I was ducking even lower, but I saw him pointing to the balcony. 

The double doors to the courtroom flew open, and the stampede was on. In the hysteria 
that followed, I stayed in my seat and tried to take in everything. I remember seeing 
Lucien Wilbanks hovering over his client. And Rufus Buckley on his hands and knees, 
scurrying in front of the jury box in an effort to escape. And I’ll never forget Judge Noose, 
sitting calmly at the bench, reading glasses perched on the tip of his nose, watching the 
chaos as if he saw it every week. 


Each second seemed to last a minute. 

The shots that hit Danny were fired from the ceiling above the balcony. And, though the 
balcony was filled with people, no one saw the rifle drop down a few inches ten feet 
above their heads. Like the rest of us, they were preoccupied with getting a first glance at 
Danny Padgitt. 

The county had patched and renovated the courtroom at various times over the decades, 
whenever a few spare bucks could be squeezed from the coffers. Back in the late sixties, 
in an effort to improve the lighting, a dropped ceiling had been installed. The sniper 
found the perfect spot on a heating duct just above a panel in the ceiling. There, in the 
dark crawl space, he waited patiently, watching the courtroom below through a five-inch 
slit he’d created by lifting one of the water-stained panels. 

When I thought the shooting was over, I crept closer to the bar. The cops were yelling for 
everybody to get out of the courtroom. They were shoving people and barking all sorts of 
contradictory instructions. Danny was under the table, attended to by Lucien and several 
deputies. I could see his feet, and they were not moving. A minute or two passed, and the 
confusion was subsiding. Suddenly, there was more gunfire; thankfully, now it was 
outside. I looked out a courtroom window and saw people scampering into the stores 
around the square. I saw an old man point upward, sort of above my head, to something 
on the top of the courthouse. 

Sheriff McNatt had just found the crawl space when he heard shots above him. He and 
two deputies climbed the stairs to the third floor, then slowly took the cramped circular 
stairway through the dome. The door to the cupola was jammed shut, but just above it 
they could hear the anxious footsteps of the sniper. And they could hear shell casings hit 
the floor. 

His only target was the law offices of Lucien Wilbanks, specifically the upstairs windows. 
With great deliberation he was blowing them out, one by one. Downstairs, Ethel Twitty 
was under her desk, bawling and screaming at the same time. 

I finally left the courtroom and hustled downstairs to the main floor, where the crowd was 
waiting, uncertain what to do. The police chief was telling everyone to stay inside. 
Between bursts of gunfire, the chatter was fast and nervous. When the shooting started, 
we gawked at one another. Each one of us was thinking, “How long will this go on?” 

I huddled with the Ruffin family. Miss Callie had fainted when the first shot jolted the 
courtroom. Max and Bobby were clutching her, anxious to get her home. 

*** 


After holding the town hostage for an hour, the sniper ran out of ammunition. He saved 
the last bullet for himself, and when he pulled the trigger he fell hard on the small 
passage door in the floor of the cupola. Sheriff McNatt waited a few minutes, then 
managed to shove the door up and open. The body of Hank Hooten was naked again. And 
as dead as fresh roadkill. 

A deputy ran down the stairs and yelled, “It’s over! He’s dead! It’s Hank Hooten!” 

The bewildered expressions were almost amusing. Hank Hooten? Everyone said the 
name but no words came out. Hank Hooten? 

“That lawyer who went crazy.” 

“I thought he got sent away.” 

“Isn’t he in Whitfield?” 

“Thought he was dead.” 

“Who’s Hank Hooten?” Carlota asked me, but I was too confused to give an answer. We 
spilled outside under the shade trees and lingered for a while, not certain whether we 
should stay in case there was another incredible event, or go home and try to comprehend 
the one we’d just lived through. The Ruffin clan left quickly; Miss Callie was not feeling 
well. 

Eventually, an ambulance carrying Danny Padgitt pulled away from the courthouse and 
left in no hurry whatsoever. The removal of Hank Hooten was a bit more demanding, but 
with time they wrestled down his corpse, then rolled it out of the courthouse on a gurney, 
covered from head to toe with a white sheet. 

I walked to my office, where Margaret and Wiley were sipping fresh coffee and waiting 
for me. We were too stunned to engage in intelligent conversation. The entire town was 
muted. 

I eventually made some phone calls, found who I wanted, and around noon left the office. 
As I drove around the square, I saw Mr. Dex Pratt, who owned the local glass company 
and ran an ad in the Times every week, on the balcony at Lucien’s, already removing the 
French doors and replacing panes. I was sure Lucien was home by then, already hitting 
the sauce on his porch, from where he could see the dome and the cupola of the 
courthouse. 

Whitfield was three hours to the south. I wasn’t sure if I would make it that far, because 
at any moment I was likely to turn right, head west, cross the river at Greenville or 


Vicksburg, and be somewhere deep in Texas by dusk. Or take a left, head east, and find a 
very late dinner somewhere close to Atlanta. 

What madness. How did such a pleasant little town end up in such a nightmare? I just 
wanted out. 

I was near Jackson before I came out of my trance. 

*** 

The state mental hospital was twenty miles east of Jackson on an interstate highway. I 
bluffed my way through the guardhouse, using the name of a doctor I’d located fishing 
around with the phone. 

Dr. Vero was very busy, and I read magazines for an hour outside his office. When I 
informed the girl at the desk that I was not leaving, and that I would follow him home if 
necessary, he somehow found the time to squeeze me in. 

Vero had long hair and a grayish beard. His accent was clearly upper midwest. Two 
diplomas on his wall tracked him through Northwestern and Johns Hopkins, though in the 
dingy light of his debris-strewn office I couldn’t read the details. 

I told him what had happened that morning in Clanton. After my narrative he said, “I 
can’t talk about Mr. Hooten. As I explained on the phone, we have a doctor-patient 
privilege.” 

“Had. Not have.” 

“It survives, Mr. Traynor. It’s still alive, and I’m afraid I can’t discuss this patient.” 

I’d been around Harry Rex long enough to know that you never took no for an answer. I 
launched into a long and detailed account of the Padgitt case, from the trial to the parole 
to the last month and the tension in Clanton. I told the story of seeing Hank Hooten late 
one Sunday night in the Calico Ridge Independent Church, and how no one seemed to 
know anything about him during the last years of his life. 

My angle was that the town needed to know what made him snap. How sick was he? 
Why was he released? There were many questions, and before “we” could put the tragic 
episode behind “us,” then “we” needed the truth. I caught myself pleading for 
information. 


“How much will you print?” he asked, breaking the ice. 

“I’ll print what you tell me to print. And if something’s off-limits, just say so.” 

“Let’s take a walk.” 

On a concrete bench, in a small shaded courtyard, we sipped coffee from paper cups. 
“This is what you can print,” Vero began. “Mr. Hooten was admitted here in January 
1971. He was diagnosed as schizophrenic, confined here, treated here, and released in 
October 1976.” 

“Who diagnosed him?” I asked. 

“We now go off the record. Agreed?” 

“Agreed.” 

“This must be confidential, Mr. Traynor. I must have your word on this.” 

I put away my pen and notepad and said, “I swear on the Bible that this will not be 
printed.” 

He hesitated for a long time, took several sips of his coffee, and for a moment I thought 
he might clam up and ask me to leave. Then he relaxed a little, and said, “I treated Mr. 
Hooten initially. His family had a history of schizophrenia. His mother and possibly his 
grandmother suffered from it. Quite often genetics play a role in the disease. He was 
institutionalized while he was in college, and remarkably, managed to finish law school. 
After his second divorce, he moved to Clanton in the mid-sixties, looking for a place to 
start over. Another divorce followed. He adored women, but could not survive in a 
relationship. He was quite enamored with Rhoda Kassellaw and claimed he asked her to 
marry him repeatedly. I’m sure the young lady was somewhat wary of him. Her murder 
was very traumatic. And when the jury refused to send her killer to death, he, shall I say, 
slipped over the edge.” 

“Thank you for using layman’s terms,” I said. I remembered the diagnosis around town— 
»slap-ass crazy.” 

“He heard voices, the principal one being that of Miss Kassellaw. Her two small children 
also talked to him. They begged him to protect her, to save her. They described the horror 
of watching their mother get raped and murdered in her own bed, and they blamed Mr. 
Hooten for not saving her. Her killer, Mr. Padgitt, also tormented him with taunts from 
prison. On many occasions I watched by closed circuit as Mr. Hooten screamed at Danny 
Padgitt from his room here.” 

“Did he mention the jurors?” 


“Oh yes, all the time. He knew that three of them—Mr. Fargarson, Mr. Teale, and Mrs. 
Root—had refused to bring back a death penalty. He would scream their names in the 
middle of the night.” 

“That’s amazing. The jurors vowed to never discuss their deliberations. We didn’t know 
how they voted until a month ago.” 

“Well, he was the assistant prosecutor.” 

“Yes, he was.” I vividly remembered Hank Hooten sitting beside Ernie Gaddis at the trial, 
never saying a word, looking bored and detached from the proceedings. “Did he express a 
desire to seek revenge?” 

A sip of coffee, another pause as he debated whether to answer. “Yes. He hated them. He 
wanted them dead, along with Mr. Padgitt.” 

“Then why was he released?” 

“I can’t talk about his release, Mr. Traynor. I wasn’t here at the time, and there might be 
some liability on the part of this institution.” 

“You weren’t here?” 

“I left for two years to teach in Chicago. When I returned eighteen months ago, Mr. 
Hooten was gone.” 

“But you’ve reviewed his file.” 

“Yes, and his condition improved dramatically while I was away. The doctors found the 
right mix of antipsychotic drugs and his symptoms diminished substantially. He was 
released to a community treatment program in Tupelo, and from there he sort of fell off 
our radar. Needless to say, Mr. Traynor, the treatment of the mentally ill is not a priority 
in this state, nor in many others. We are grossly understaffed and underfunded.” 

“Would you have released him?” 

“I cannot answer that. At this point, Mr. Traynor, I think I’ve said enough.” 

I thanked him for his time, for his candor, and once again promised to protect his 
confidence. He asked for a copy of whatever I printed. 

I stopped at a fast-food place in Jackson for a cheeseburger. At a pay phone I called the 
office, half-wondering if I’d missed more shootings. Margaret was relieved to hear my 
voice. 

“You must come home, Willie, and quickly,” she said. 


“Why?” 

“Callie Ruffin has had a stroke. She’s in the hospital.” 

“Is it serious?” 

“I’m afraid so.” 

Chapter 44 

A county bond issue in 1977 had paid for a handsome renovation to our hospital. At one 
end of the main floor there was a modern, though quite dark, chapel where I’d once sat 
with Margaret and her family as her mother passed away. It was there that I found the 
Ruffins, all eight children, all twenty-one grandchildren, and every spouse but Leon’s 
wife. Reverend Thurston Small was there, along with a sizable contingent from the 
church. Esau was upstairs in the intensive care unit, waiting outside Miss Callie’s room. 

Sam told me that she had awakened from a nap with a sharp pain in her left arm, then 
numbness in her leg, and before long she was mumbling incoherently. An ambulance 
rushed her to the hospital. The doctor was certain it was initially a stroke, one that 
precipitated a mild heart attack. She was being heavily medicated and monitored. The last 
report from the doctor had been around 8 P.M.; her condition was described as “serious 
but stable.” 

Visitors were not allowed, so there was little to do but wait and pray and greet friends as 
they came and went. After an hour in the chapel, I was ready for bed. Max, third in the 
birth order but the undeniable leader, organized a schedule for the night. At least two of 
Miss Gallic’s children would be somewhere in the hospital at all times. 

We checked with the doctor again around eleven, and he sounded reasonably optimistic 
that she was still stable. She was “asleep” as he put it, but upon further questioning 
admitted that they had her knocked out to prevent another stroke. “Go home and rest,” he 
said. “Tomorrow could be a long day.” We left Mario and Gloria in the chapel, and 
moved en masse to the Hocutt House where we ate ice cream on a side porch. Sam had 
taken Esau home to Lowtown. I was delighted that the rest of the family preferred staying 
at my place. 

Of the thirteen adults there, only Leon and Carlota’s husband, Sterling, would touch 
alcohol. I opened a bottle of wine, and the three of us passed on the ice cream. 


Everyone was exhausted, especially the children. The day had begun with an adventure to 
the courthouse for a peek at the man who’d been terrorizing our community. That seemed 
like a week ago. Around midnight, Al gathered the family together in my den for one last 
word of prayer. A “chain prayer” as he called it, in which every adult and child gave 
thanks for something and asked for God’s protection of Miss Callie. Sitting there on my 
sofa, fervently holding hands with Bonnie and with Mario’s wife, I felt the presence of 
the Lord. I knew my beloved friend, their mother and grandmother, would be fine. 

Two hours later I was lying in bed, wide awake, still hearing the sharp crack of the rifle 
in the courtroom, the thud of the bullet as it hit Danny, the panic that followed. I rewound 
and replayed every word of Dr. Vero’s, and wondered in what manner of hell poor Hank 
Hooten had been living for the past few years. Why had he been set loose on society 
again? 

And I worried about Miss Callie, though her condition seemed to be under control and 
she was in good hands. 

I eventually slept for two hours, then eased downstairs where I found Mario and Leon 
drinking coffee at the kitchen table. Mario had left the hospital an hour earlier; there’d 
been no change. They were already plotting the stringent weight reduction plan the 
family would impose on Miss Callie when she was back home. And she would begin an 
exercise program that would include long walks each day around Low-town. Regular 
checkups, vitamins, lean foods. 

They were serious about this new health regimen, though everyone knew that Miss Callie 
would do exactly as she wished. 

*** 

A few hours later, I began the chore of boxing up the things and junk I’d collected in nine 
years, and cleaning out my office. The new editor was a pleasant lady from Meridian, 
Mississippi, and she wanted to get started by the weekend. Margaret offered to help, but I 
wanted to go slowly and reminisce as I emptied drawers and files. It was a personal 
moment, and I preferred to be alone. 

Mr. Caudle’s books were finally removed from the dusty shelves where they had been 
placed long before I arrived. I planned to store them somewhere at home, in case an 
ancestor of his showed up and asked questions. 

My emotions were mixed. Everything I touched brought back a story, a deadline, a trip 
deep into the county to chase a lead, interview a witness, or meet someone I hoped would 


be interesting enough for a profile. And the sooner I finished the packing, the closer I 
would be to walking out of the building and catching an airplane. 

Bobby Ruffin called at nine-thirty. Miss Callie was awake, sitting up, sipping some tea, 
and they were allowing visitors for a few minutes. I hurried to the hospital. Sam met me 
in the hall and led me through the maze of rooms and cubicles in ICU. “Don’t talk about 
anything that happened yesterday, okay?” he said as we walked. 

“Sure.” 

“Nothing exciting. They won’t even allow the grandkids in; afraid that would make her 
heart rate go crazy. Everything is real quiet.” 

She was awake, but barely. I had expected to see the bright eyes and brilliant smile, but 
Miss Callie was barely conscious. She recognized me, we hugged, I patted her right hand. 
The left one had an IV Sam, Esau, and Gloria were in the room. 

I wanted a few minutes alone so I could finally tell her I was selling the paper, but she 
was in no condition for such news. She’d been awake for almost two hours, and she 
obviously needed more sleep. Perhaps in a day or so we could have a lively chat about it. 

After fifteen minutes, the doctor showed up and asked us to leave. We left, we came back, 
and the vigil continued throughout the Fourth of July, though we were not allowed inside 
the ICU again. 

*** 

The Mayor decided there would be no fireworks for the Fourth. We’d heard enough 
explosions, suffered enough from gunpowder. Given the town’s lingering jumpiness, 
there was no organized objection. The bands marched, the parade went on, the political 
speeches were the same as before, though with fewer candidates. Senator Theo Morton 
was a conspicuous no-show. There was ice cream, lemonade, barbecue, cotton candy— 
the usual food and snacks on the courthouse lawn. 

But the town was subdued. Or maybe it was just me. Maybe I was just so tired of the 
place that nothing seemed right about it. I certainly had the remedy. 

After the speeches, I left the square and drove back to the hospital, a little detour that was 
becoming monotonous. I spoke to Fuzzy, who swept the hospital parking lot, and to 
Ralph, who washed the windows of the lobby. I stopped by the canteen and bought 
another lemonade from Hazel, then spoke to Mrs. Esther Ellen Trussel, who was manning 


the front information desk on behalf of the Pink Ladies, the hospital’s auxiliary. In the 
waiting room on the second floor I found Bobby with Al’s wife; they were watching 
television like two zombies. I had just opened a magazine when Sam came running in. 

“She’s had another heart attack!” he said. 

The three of us jumped to our feet as if we had somewhere to go. 

“It just happened! They got the red team in there!” 

“I’ll call the house,” I said, and stepped to the pay phone in the hall. Max answered the 
phone, and fifteen minutes later the Ruffins were streaming into the chapel. 

The doctors took forever before giving us an update. It was almost eight P.M. before her 
treating physician entered the chapel. Doctors are notoriously hard to read, but his heavy 
eyes and wrinkled brow conveyed an unmistakable message. As he described a 
“significant cardiac arrest” the eight children of Miss Callie deflated as a group. She was 
on a respirator, no longer able to breathe by herself. 

Within an hour, the chapel was full of her friends. Reverend Thurston Small led a 
nonstop prayer group near the altar, and people joined it and left it as they wished. Poor 
Esau sat on the back row, slumped over, thoroughly drained. His grandchildren 
surrounded him, all very quiet and respectful. 

For hours, we waited. And though we tried to smile and be optimistic, there was a feeling 
of doom. It was as if the funeral had already begun. 

Margaret stopped by and we chatted in the hallway. Later, Mr. and Mrs. Fargarson found 
me and asked to speak to Esau. I led them into the chapel, where they were welcomed 
warmly by the Ruffins, all of whom expressed great sympathy for the loss of their son. 

By midnight we were numb and rapidly losing track of time. Minutes dragged by, then I 
would look at the clock on the wall and wonder where the past hour went. I wanted to 
leave, if only to walk outside and breathe fresh air. The doctor, however, had warned us 
to stay close. 

The horror of the ordeal hit when he gathered us around and gravely said it was time for a 
“final moment with the family.” There were gasps, then tears. I’ll never forget hearing 
Sam say out loud, “A final moment?” 

“This is it?” Gloria asked in absolute terror. 

Frightened and bewildered, we followed the doctor out of the chapel, down the hall, up a 
flight of stairs, all of us moving with the heavy feet of someone marching to his own 
execution. The nurses helped herd us through the maze in ICU, their faces telling us what 
we dreaded the most. 


As the family filed into the cramped little room, the doctor touched my arm and said, 
“This should be just for the family.” 

“Right,” I said, stopping. 

“It’s okay,” Sam said. “He’s with us.” 

We packed around Miss Callie and her machines, most of which had been disconnected. 
The two smallest grandchildren were placed at the foot of her bed. Esau stood closest to 
her, gently patting her face. Her eyes were closed; she did not appear to be breathing. 

She was very much at peace. Her husband and children touched some part of her, and the 
crying was heartbreaking. I was in a corner, wedged behind Gloria’s husband and Al’s 
wife, and I simply could not believe where I was or what I was doing. 

When Max got his emotions under control, he touched Miss Callie’s arm and said, “Let 
us pray.” We bowed our heads and most of the crying stopped, for a moment anyway. 
“Dear Lord, not our will but yours. Into thine hands we commend the spirit of this 
faithful child of God. Prepare a place for her now in your heavenly kingdom. Amen.” 

*** 

At sunrise, I was sitting on the porch outside my office. I wanted to be alone, to have a 
good cry in private. The crying around my house was more than I could bear. 

As I had dreamed of traveling the world, I had the recurring vision of returning to 
Clanton with gifts for Miss Callie. I’d bring her a silver vase from England, linens from 
the Italy she would never see, perfumes from Paris, chocolates from Belgium, an urn 
from Egypt, a small diamond from the mines of South Africa. I would present these to 
her on her porch, before we had lunch, then we would talk about the places they came 
from. I would send her postcards at every stop. We would review my photographs in 
great detail. Through me, she would vicariously see the world. She would always be there, 
waiting eagerly for my return, anxious to see what I’d brought her. She would fill her 
home with little pieces of the world, and own things that no one, black or white, had ever 
owned in Clanton. 

I ached with the loss of my dear friend. Its suddenness was cruel, as it always is. Its depth 
was so immense that I could not, at that time, imagine a recovery. 


As the town slowly came to life below me, I walked to my desk, shoved some boxes out 
of the way, and sat down. I took my pen, and for a long time stared at a blank notepad. 
Eventually, slowly, with great agony, I began the last obituary. 

Author’s Note 

Very few laws remain the same. Once enacted, they are likely to be studied, modified, 
amended, then often repealed altogether. This constant tinkering by judges and 
lawmakers is usually a good thing. Bad laws are weeded out. Weak laws are improved. 
Good laws are fine tuned. 

I took great liberty with a few of the laws that existed in Mississippi in the 1970s. The 
ones I mistreated in this book have now been amended and improved. I misused them to 
move my story along. I do this all the time and never feel guilty about it, since I can 
always disclaim things on this page. 

If you spot these mistakes, please don’t write me a letter. I acknowledge my mistakes. 
They were intentional. 

Thanks to Grady Tollison and Ed Perry of Oxford, Mississippi, for their recollections of 
old laws and procedures. And to Don Whitten and Mr. Jessie Phillips of TheOxford Eagle. 
And to Gary Greene for technical advice. 


